Let him, who would fully understand
what I now saw, imagine -- and let him, while I speak,
hold that image, steady as a rock --
fifteen stars that light up various regions
of the sky, and with such brightness
as to overcome the intervening haze.
Let him imagine the Wain, nestling
in the bosom of our sky both night and day
so that its wheeling shaft is never out of sight.
Let him imagine the mouth of that horn
descending from the axle's endpoint
around which the first wheel revolves,
and all these seen together to have formed, up in the sky,
a double constellation, like the ring once formed
of Minos' daughter when she felt the chill of death,
the rays of one reflected in the other,
with both revolving in such manner
that one went first and then the other followed.
Then he will have, as it were, the shadow
of the true constellation and the double dance
that wheeled around the point where I now was,
for it is as far beyond our understanding
as the speed of the heaven that exceeds all others
outstrips the muddy stirrings of the Chiana.
There they sang the praises not of Bacchus nor of Paean
but praised the divine nature in three Persons,
and in one Person sang that nature joined with man.
Having done the measure of their song and circling dance,
these holy lights turned toward us,
rejoicing as they passed from task to task.
The silence among those holy souls in harmony
was broken by the light that had told me
the wondrous life of the poor man of God.
He said: 'Now that one sheaf is threshed
and its grain now gathered,
sweet charity bids me thresh the other.
'You believe that, into the side from which
the rib was drawn to form the lovely features
of her whose palate costs the world so dear,
'and into His, pierced by the spear, which gave
such satisfaction for sins, both done or yet to be,
as outweighs any fault found in the balance,
'all the light that is allowed to human nature
was infused by the very Power
which made the one and made the other.
'And thus you marvel at what I said before,
when I told you that the goodness
contained in the fifth light never had an equal.
'Open your eyes to the answer I shall give
and you shall find your thoughts and what I say
meet at the truth as in the center of a circle.
'That which does not die and that which must
are nothing but a bright reflection of that Idea
which our Lord, in loving, brings to birth.
'For that living Light, which so streams forth
from its shining Source that it neither parts from it
nor from the Love that is intrined with them,
'of its own goodness gathers its own shining,
as though it were a mirror, in nine subsistences,
and yet eternally endures as one.
'From that height light descends to the lowest elements,
passing down from act to act, becoming such
that it produces nothing more than brief contingencies.
'By these contingent things I mean
things generated, with seed or without,
produced by the movements of the heavens.
'Their wax and that which molds it vary so
that, beneath the Idea's imprint,
light shines in varying degrees.
And so it happens that trees of the very same kind
bear fruit, some of it better and some of it worse,
and that you are born with differing talents.
'If the wax were perfectly prepared
and the heaven at the height of its power,
in all its brightness would the seal be seen.
'But nature always fashions it defective,
working like the craftsman who, to the practice
of his craft, brings an unsteady hand.
'However, if the clear vision of the primal Power
is moved by burning Love and makes of that its seal,
then all perfection is attained in it.
'In that way was the dust made ready to receive -- 
once -- perfection in a living creature,
in that way was the Virgin made to be with child.
'Thus do I agree with your opinion
that human nature never was -- nor shall it be --
what it was in these two creatures.
'Now, if I went no farther,
"How, then, was that other without equal?"
would be the first words from your mouth.
'But, to make quite clear what still remains obscure,
think who he was and what it was that moved him
to his request when he was bidden "Ask."
'I did not speak so darkly that you cannot see
he was a king and asked for wisdom
that he might become a worthy king.
'He did not ask to know the number of the angels
here above, nor if necesse
with a contingent ever made necesse,
'nor si est dare primum motum esse,
nor if in a semicircle a triangle can be formed
without its having one right angle.
'Therefore, if you reflect on this and what I said,
kingly prudence is that peerless vision
on which the arrow of my purpose strikes.
'And if you examine my use of "rose" with open eyes,
you will see that it referred alone to kings -- 
of whom there are so many, but the good ones rare.
'Take my words, along with this distinction,
and they can stand alongside your beliefs
concerning the first father and the One we love.
'And let this always be as lead upon your feet
to make you slow, just like a weary man, in moving,
whether to yes or no, unless you see both clearly.
'For he ranks low among the fools
who, without making clear distinctions,
affirms or denies in one case or another,
'since it often happens that a hasty opinion
inclines one to the erring side, and then
fondness for it fetters the working of the mind.
'He who casts off from shore to fish for truth
without the necessary skill does not return the same
as he sets out, but worse, and all in vain.
'Clear proof of this was given to the world
by Parmenides, Melissus, Bryson, and others,
who went to sea without a port in mind.
'Such were Sabellius and Arius and the fools
who misread Scripture as a sword reflecting
the distorted image of a face upon its blade.
'Let the people, then, not be too certain
in their judgments, like those that harvest in their minds
corn still in the field before it ripens.
'For I have seen the briar first look dry and thorny
right through all the winter's cold,
then later wear the bloom of roses at its tip,
'and once I saw a ship, which had sailed straight
and swift upon the sea through all its voyage,
sinking at the end as it made its way to port.
'Let not Dame Bertha and Master Martin,
when they see one steal and another offer alms,
think that they behold them with God's wisdom,
for the first may still rise up, the other fall.'