After drawing these comparisons with the first seven heavens, we must now go on to do the same with those that remain, of which there are three, as has been explained several times. I declare that the Heaven of the Stars may be compared to Physics on account of three properties, and to Metaphysics on account of a further three. For it displays to us two features visible within it, the multitudinous stars and the Galaxy, that is, the white circle popularly known as St. James' Way; and it displays to us one of its movements, that from east to west, while keeping almost hidden from us its other movement, from west to east. And so I must explain the similarities first with Physics, then with Metaphysics.
I declare that the Heaven of the Stars displays to us a multitude of stars, for the observations of the Egyptian experts, extending to the furthest star visible to them in the south, led them to assert that there are 1,022 stellar bodies, which are my present subject. This feature gives it a very close similarity to Physics, as becomes clear if we reflect carefully on these three numbers, that is, on two, twenty and a thousand.
For the number "two" we take to indicate local movement, which by definition occurs between two distinct points. The number "twenty" signifies the process involved in modification, for since one cannot proceed beyond ten except by modifying ten by means of the other nine numbers or by that number itself, and since the most beautiful modification ten undergoes is when it is modified by itself, and, since, further, the first occasion on which this occurs is at the number twenty, it is appropriate that the process mentioned be signified by this number.
The number "a thousand" signifies the process involved in increase, for the highest figure for which there is a specific word is a thousand, and no further increase is possible except by multiplying this number. Physics is concerned with elucidating these three processes only, as is demonstrated in the fifth book of Aristotle's first treatise dealing with the subject.
The Galaxy gives this heaven a close similarity to Metaphysics. It should be said here that philosophers have held different opinions about the Galaxy. The Pythagoreans said that the Sun once strayed from its course and, passing through other regions unsuited to its intense heat, scorched the area through which it passed, so that what is visible to us is the mark left there by that scorching. (It is my belief that this view was suggested by the fable of Phaeton, narrated by Ovid at the beginning of the second book of the Metamorphoses.)
Others, such as Anaxagoras and Democritus, said that the phenomenon consisted of sunlight reflected from that region, and they put forward various arguments in support of their opinion. What Aristotle said on this matter cannot be known for certain, because the two translations give different accounts of his view.
I believe that this is due to an error on the part of translators, for in the New Version they give him as saying that the phenomenon consists of a cloud formed beneath the stars of that region by the vapours which the stars there always have in train; this does not seem to be an accurate explanation. In the Old Version he says that the Galaxy is simply a multitude of stars permanently located in that region, stars so small that at this distance we cannot distinguish them individually: to us they present the appearance of that white mass to which we have given the name of Galaxy; this may well be the case, because in that region the heaven is of greater density, which would explain why it holds that light and presents it to view. This seems to be the opinion held by Avicenna and Ptolemy, along with Aristotle.
Since, consequently, the Galaxy is an effect caused by the stars we cannot perceive, except in so far as we know them through their effect, and since Metaphysics treats of the primary substances, which similarly we cannot know except through their effects, it is clear that the Heaven of the Stars has a close similarity to Metaphysics.
Furthermore, the pole of this heaven which we see signifies things that can be perceived by the senses, which form the subject of Physics; and the pole which we do not see signifies things which are without matter, things which cannot be perceived by the senses, which form the subject of Metaphysics. For this reason, then, the heaven under discussion has a close similarity to each of these sciences.
Moreover, by its two movements it signifies these two sciences. For by the movement in which it every day goes through a revolution, and circles anew to the very point from which it started, it signifies those things of nature which are subject to decay, which day by day complete their passage and have their matter transferred from one form to another; these are what Physics considers.
By the almost imperceptible movement this heaven makes from west to east, shifting one degree in a hundred years, it signifies beings not subject to decay, which had a beginning through God's act of creation but will never have an end; these are what Metaphysics considers.
Consequently, I declare that this movement signifies these beings in that their revolution comes to an end when it returns to the same point, a point which this heaven in pursuing this movement will never reach.
For since the beginning of the world little more than a sixth of the revolution has been completed, while we live in the final stage of history, and indeed in expectation of the consummation of the movement of the heavens. It is clear, then, that the Heaven of the Stars may on account of many properties be compared to Physics and Metaphysics.
The Crystalline Heaven, described as the First Moving Body in the account given above, is quite clearly similar to Moral Philosophy, because, as Thomas says in his commentary on the second book of the Ethics, Moral Philosophy directs us towards the other sciences.
For, as the Philosopher states in the fifth book of the Ethics, "civic justice directs that the sciences be learned in due order, and, to ensure that they never be abandoned, commands that they be both learned and taught"; similarly the heaven just mentioned directs with its movement the daily revolution of all the others, by which means all those heavens every day receive and communicate to our world below the. power invested in their every part,
for if the revolution of this heaven did not direct this, little of their power would come down to our world below, and we would have little sight of them. Consequently, in the hypothetical case that this ninth heaven did not move, a third of the Heaven of the Stars would not yet have been seen from any place on earth; Saturn would be hidden from every place on earth for 14½ years; Jupiter would be hidden for almost six years, Mars for almost a year, the Sun for 182 days and 14 hours. Venus and Mercury would be hidden and be visible for much the same time as the Sun, and the Moon would remain concealed from all mankind for 14½ days.
And indeed in this world below, plant and animal life would neither be generated nor continue; there would be neither night nor day, no weeks, months or years, and in fact the whole universe would be thrown into disorder, and the movement of other heavens would be in vain.
In the same way, should Moral Philosophy disappear, the other sciences would be hidden for some time, the life of happiness would neither be generated nor continue, and it would have been in vain that the sciences were discovered in ancient times and committed to writing. It is quite clear, then, that this heaven has a similarity to Moral Philosophy.
Furthermore, the Empyrean Heaven on account of its peace resembles the Science of Divinity, which is filled with perfect peace; this science does not at all permit of the strife that comes from differences in opinion or from sophistical arguments, in virtue of the supreme certainty intrinsic to its subject, God. Speaking of this science, He Himself says to His disciples, "My peace I give to you, my peace I bequeath to you", as He gives and bequeaths to them His teaching, which is the science of which I am speaking.
Referring to it, Solomon says: "There are no less than sixty queens, and eighty concubines; as for young handmaids, they are past counting; but unique is she who is my dove, my perfect one." He calls all the sciences queens and lovers and handmaids, but this one he calls a dove, because it is unblemished by strife; this he calls perfect, because it enables us to see perfectly the truth in which our souls find rest.
So, now that the comparison between the heavens and the sciences has been explained, it will be apparent that in speaking of the third heaven I refer to Rhetoric, which bears a likeness to the third heaven, as is clear from the above.
