I want to be as harsh in my speech as this fair stone is in her behaviour‑she who at every moment acquires greater hardness and a crueller nature, and arms her body with jasper such that, because of it, or because she retreats, no arrow ever came from quiver that could catch her unprotected. But she is a killer, and it is no use putting on armour or fleeing from her deadly blows, which find their target as though they had wings and shatter one's every weapon; so that I've neither the skill nor the strength to defend myself from her.
I cannot find a shield that she does not shatter, nor a place to hide from her face; for like a flower on its stalk so she holds the crest of my mind. She heeds my misery no more than a ship heeds a sea that lifts no wave; and the weight that sinks me is such that no verse would suffice to describe it. Ah, agonizing merciless file that hiddenly rasps my life away! Why do you not refrain from so gnawing my heart through layer by layer, as I do from revealing who she is who gives you strength?
For whenever I think of her in a place where another may turn his eyes, my heart trembles more with fear lest my thought shine out and be discovered, than I tremble at that death which already is devouring all my senses with the teeth of Love; that is, my torment is gnawing away their strength and slowing down their action. Love has struck me to the ground and stands over me with the sword with which he slew Dido, and I cry to him calling for mercy, and humbly I implore him, but he shows himself set against all mercy.
Again and again he raises his hand threatening my weakened life, this evil one who pins me to the ground, flat on my back, and too exhausted to move. Then shrieks arise in my mind, and the blood that was dispersed through my veins runs fleeing back to the heart that summons it, so that I am left white. He strikes me under the left arm so violently that the pain rebounds through my heart. Then I say: ‘If he lifts his hand again, death will have locked me in before the blow descends.’
Would that I could see him split the heart of the cruel woman who cuts mine to pieces! For then that death would not seem black to me, to which her beauty drives me‑striking as she does with equal force in sunlight and in shade, this murderous assassin and robber. Alas, why does she not howl for me in the hot gorge, as I do for her? For at once I'd cry: ‘I'll help you’: and gladly would I do so, for in the yellow hair that Love curls and gilds for my destruction I'd put my hand, and then she would begin to love me.
Once I'd taken in my hand the fair locks which have become my whip and lash, seizing them before terce I'd pass through vespers with them and the evening bell: and I'd not show pity or courtesy, O no, I'd be like a bear at play. And though Love whips me with them now, I would take my revenge more than a thousandfold. Still more, I'd gaze into those eyes whence come the sparks that inflame my heart which is dead within me; I'd gaze into them close and fixedly, to revenge myself on her for fleeing from me as she does: and then with love I would make our peace.
Song, go straight to that woman who has wounded my heart and robs me of what I most hunger for, and drive an arrow through her heart: for great honour is gained through taking revenge.

Congedo