All that remains to be done now is to prove that riches are base, and that they are unconnected with and far removed from nobility. I do this in two short passages in the text which we must now examine. When these have been explained, what I said about riches being base and far removed from nobility will be substantiated, and with this the arguments against riches outlined above will be fully demonstrated.
I say, then: It is clear that riches are base and imperfect. To substantiate what the text claims here it should be explained that the baseness of anything is determined by its imperfection, and its nobility by its perfection. So the degree to which a thing is perfect is the degree to which it is noble in the particular nature it possesses; the degree to which it is imperfect is the degree to which it is base. It clearly follows that if riches are imperfect they are also base.
The text proves briefly that they are imperfect where it says: No matter how abundantly amassed, they cannot still our desire; indeed they bring increasing anxiety. These lines show clearly not only that riches are imperfect, but that it is intrinsic to them to be thoroughly imperfect, and, therefore, thoroughly base. Lucan testifies to this when he addresses them in the words: "The laws perished without being defended; but you, riches, basest of all things, caused strife."
Put briefly, their imperfection can be clearly recognized in three features: first, their acquisition is fortuitous; second, their increase carries many dangers; third, their possession is harmful. Before substantiating these claims, I must deal with a doubt that may arise. Since gold, pearls and lands do not lack perfection as beings, all having their proper form and act of existence, it seems incorrect to say that they are imperfect.
The reply to this is that these things considered simply in themselves are indeed perfect; as such, they are not riches but simply gold, pearls, etc. They are riches in so far as they are apt to become human possessions; as such, they are imperfect in many ways. It is quite possible for the same thing to be perfect and imperfect when considered from different points of view.
The imperfection of riches can be seen, first, in the fortuitousness that marks their acquisition, for in this distributive justice is conspicuous by being totally absent, while rank inequity is almost always present, which is the distinctive effect of imperfection.
If we look at the ways in which riches are obtained, we find that these can all be classified under one of three heads. Riches are obtained either as the result of pure chance, as in the case of someone finding something quite unintentionally, without any previous thought or hope of doing so; or as the result of chance aided by reason, as in the case of someone being left something in a will or succeeding to his due inheritance; or as the result of reason aided by chance, as in the case of someone's licitly or illicitly gaining something through his own enterprise.
In each of these three ways one sees present the inequity of which I have spoken. For hidden riches which are discovered or rediscovered more often fall into the hands of evil people than of good, a fact so obvious as to need no proof. I myself have seen the spot on the side of a mountain in Tuscany called Falterona where, in the course of turning the soil, the basest peasant in the whole district discovered more than a bushel of the most precious silver coins which had lain waiting for him for perhaps 2,000 years or more.
It was awareness of this inequity that led Aristotle to say: "The more a person depends on reason, the less dependent he is on chance." Similarly, inherited goods, legacies and gifts more often come the way of evil people than of good. I do not intend to adduce any evidence for this; I simply invite everyone to look around his own neighbourhood, and he will see proof of what I decline to specify in order to avoid giving anyone a bad name.
I wish God had seen fit to bring to pass what the Provençal asked: that whoever does not inherit good character should be excluded from inheriting riches. Furthermore, things gained by personal effort are precisely what more often come into the possession of evil people than of good. Illicit gains never come into the possession of good people since they will have nothing to do with them.
What good person will ever gain something by force or fraud? This is impossible by definition, since by the very act of choosing the illicit enterprise the person would cease to be good. Licit gains rarely come into the possession of good people, because this only happens if a person devotes a great deal of attention to such matters; the attention of the good person is devoted to more important affairs, so he rarely gives the attention required to make gains of this sort.
It is clear, then, that inequity marks each of the means by which these riches are obtained. For this reason our Saviour calls them iniquitous: "Make friends for yourselves with money which is iniquitous." In these words he invites and encourages people to be generous in bestowing gigs, through which friendships are born.
And what a happy exchange he makes who uses these thoroughly imperfect things as gifts in order to possess and acquire what is perfect, as are the hearts of worthy people! It is an exchange that can be made at any time. This trade certainly operates in a different way from all others; here when anyone intends to gain one person through bestowing a gift he gains thousands upon thousands.
Who to this day does not hold a place in his heart for Alexander because of his royal acts of kindness? Or for the good king of Castille, for Saladin, for the good Marquis of Monferrato, for the good count of Toulouse, for Bertran de Born, for Galeazzo of Montefeltro? When their generous giving is mentioned their memory is cherished not only by those who would gladly do the same, but even by those who would rather die than do any such thing.
