About six thousand miles away from here
the sixth hour burns and even now this world
inclines its shadow almost to a level bed,
when, deep in intervening air, above us,
begins such change that here and there,
at our depth, a star is lost to sight.
And, as that brightest handmaid of the sun advances,
the sky extinguishes its lights,
even the most beautiful, one by one.
Not otherwise the victory that revels
in eternal joy around the point that overcame me
and seems enclosed by that which it encloses
little by little faded from my sight,
so that, compelled by seeing nothing and by love,
I turned my eyes to gaze on Beatrice.
If all things said of her up to this point
were gathered in a single hymn of praise,
it would be paltry, matched to what is due.
The beauty that I saw transcends
all thought of beauty, and I must believe
only its maker may savor it all.
I declare myself defeated at this point
more than any poet, whether comic or tragic,
was ever thwarted by a topic in his theme,
for, like sunlight striking on the weakest eyes,
the memory of the sweetness of that smile
deprives my mind of my mental powers.
From the first day, when in this life I saw her face
until my vision of her now, pursuit
of her in song has never been cut off.
But now I must desist in my pursuit,
no longer following her beauty in my verse,
as every artist, having reached his limit, must.
Thus I leave her to more glorious trumpeting
than that of my own music, as, laboring on,
I bring my difficult subject toward its close.
With the voice and bearing of a guide
who has discharged his duty, she began: 'We have issued
from the largest body to the Heaven of pure light,
'light intellectual, full of love,
love of true good, full of joy,
joy that surpasses every sweetness.
'Here you shall see both soldieries of Paradise,
one of them in just such form
as you shall see it at the final judgment.'
Like sudden lightning that confounds
the faculty of sight, depriving eyes
of taking in the clearest objects,
thus did a living light shine all around me,
leaving me so swathed in the veil of its effulgence
that I saw nothing else.
'The love that calms this heaven
always offers welcome with such greetings,
to make the candle ready for its flame.'
No sooner had these few words reached my mind
than I became aware of having risen
above and well beyond my powers,
and such was the new vision kindled within me
that there exists no light so vivid that my eyes
could not have borne its brightness.
And I saw light that flowed as flows a river,
pouring its golden splendor between two banks
painted with the wondrous colors of spring.
From that torrent issued living sparks
and, on either bank, they settled on the flowers,
like rubies ringed in gold.
Then, as though intoxicated by the odors,
they plunged once more into the marvelous flood,
and, as one submerged, another would come forth.
'The deep desire that now inflames and prods you
to understand at last all that you see
pleases me the more the more it surges.
'But you must drink first of these waters
before your great thirst may be satisfied.'
Thus the sun of my eyes spoke to me.
Then she continued: 'The river, the topazes
that enter and leave it, and the laughter of the meadows
are all shadowy prefaces of their truth,
'not that these things are in themselves unripe, 
but because the failure lies with you,
your vision not yet strong enough to soar.'
No infant, waking up too late
for his accustomed feeding, will thrust his face
up to his milk with greater urgency,
than I, to make still better mirrors of my eyes,
inclined my head down toward the water
that flows there for our betterment,
and no sooner had the eaves of my eyelids
drunk deep of that water than to me it seemed
it had made its length into a circle.
Then, like people wearing masks,
once they put off the likeness not their own
in which they hid, seem other than before,
the flowers and the sparks were changed before my eyes
into a greater celebration, so that I saw,
before my very eyes, both courts of Heaven.
O splendor of God, by which I saw
the lofty triumph of the one true kingdom,
grant me the power to tell of what I saw!
There is a light above that makes the Creator
visible to every creature
that finds its only peace in seeing Him.
It spreads itself into so vast a circle
that its circumference would be larger
than the sphere that is the sun.
All that is seen of it comes as a ray reflected
from the summit of the Primum Mobile,
which draws from this its motion and its powers.
And as a hillside is mirrored by the water
at its foot, as if it saw itself adorned
when it is lush with grass and flowers,
so I saw, rising above the light and all around it
mirrored in more than a thousand tiers,
all those of us who have returned on high.
And, if the lowest of its ranks encloses
a light so large, how vast is the expanse containing
the farthest petals of this rose?
Within that breadth and height,
my sight was not confused but shared
the full extent and quality of that rejoicing.
There, near and far do neither add nor take away,
for where God, unmediated, rules
natural law has no effect.
Into the yellow of the sempiternal rose,
which rises in its ranks, expands, and exhales
fragrances that praise the Sun's perpetual spring,
I, like a man who is silent but would speak,
was led by Beatrice, and she said: 'Behold
how vast the white-robed gathering!
'See our city, with its vast expanse!
See how many are the seats already filled --
few are the souls still absent there!
'And in that great seat which draws your eyes
for the crown already set above it,
before you shall dine at this wedding feast, 
'shall sit the soul of noble Henry, 
who on earth, as emperor, shall attempt
to set things straight for Italy before she is prepared.
'Blind cupidity, bewitching you,
has made you like the infant, dying of hunger,
who shoves his nurse's breast away.
'At that time the prefect of the sacred court
will be a man who will not make his way
on the same road by daylight as he will by night.
'But short shall be the time God suffers him
in holy office, for he shall be thrust
down there where Simon Magus gets what he deserves,
and push that fellow from Anagni deeper down.'