Now that I have already discussed two parts of this canzone to bring out what I intended to convey, the plan of the present treatise requires that I go on to consider the third part, in which my aim is to clear the canzone of a charge which might be brought against it.
There I say that before I came to compose this canzone, when this lady seemed to me to have become somewhat harsh and haughty towards me, I composed a little ballata in which I called her proud and pitiless; this seems to contradict the description of her given above. And so I turn to the canzone, and under the guise of instructing it how it must excuse itself, I excuse the lady. This figure of speech, in which words are addressed to something inanimate, is called prosopopoeia in literary parlance; it is much favoured by poets.
This third part begins: Canzone, it seems that you contradict. To convey its meaning more readily, I must divide it into three sections: first it sets out why an excuse is required; then it proceeds to give the excuse, at the words, You know that the sky; finally I address the canzone as if it were a person who has been instructed regarding what he must do, when I say: Excuse yourself in this way, if need arise.
I begin, then, by saying: "O canzone, who praise this lady so highly, it seems that you contradict one of your sisters." I use the word sister metaphorically: for just as a woman who has been begotten by the same father as another woman is called her sister, so a work which results from the activity of the same agent as another may be called its sister, since our activity is in a certain sense a process of generation. I explain why this poem seems to contradict the other when I say: you describe her as humble, while the other describes her as haughty – or harsh and disdainful, which means the same.
Having stated this accusation I go on to present the excuse by giving an example in which reality sometimes differs from appearances, and can, furthermore, be treated from different points of view. I say: You know that the sky is always bright aced clear, that is, that the sky never loses its clearness, although it is sometimes permissible, for a particular reason, to speak of it as being dark.
It should be explained here that, as Aristotle indicates, it is colour and light which are visible strictly speaking. It is true that other things are visible, but not strictly speaking, for they are perceived by the use of the other senses, too, so that they cannot be said to be visible strictly speaking, nor tangible strictly speaking: in this category are such things as shape, quantity, number, movement and rest, which are called commonly sensed things, since we know them through a plurality of senses. Colour and light, however, are visible strictly speaking, because we know them through sight alone, not through the other senses too.
Whether strictly speaking or commonly visible, all things – or rather not the things themselves but their forms – come into the eye after passing along the diaphanous medium, not in their real mode but in their intentional mode, as if they were entering transparent glass.
This movement of the visible form along the medium is completed in the water found in the pupil of the eye, because the water is backed by a surface, rather like a mirror, which is made of glass backed with lead, so that the form can go no further; there, like a ball which strikes something, it comes to a halt. So this form, which does not appear in the transparent medium, appears there clear and firm. And it does so for the same reason that an image appears in glass which is backed with lead, and not in other glass.
The visual spirit which runs from the pupil to the front part of the brain, where the sensory power resides as in its source, immediately, without any lapse of time, reproduces the form from the pupil, and so seeing takes place in us. Consequently, for seeing to be truthful, that is, to represent faithfully the visible thing as it is in itself, the medium through which the form comes to the eye must be quite colourless, as must the water in the pupil; otherwise the visible form would be tainted by the colour of the medium and of the pupil.
That is why those who wish things to appear a certain colour in a mirror interpose between the glass and the lead some of that colour, so that the glass takes on its hue. Certainly, Plato and other philosophers maintained that our seeing occurs not because what is visible comes to the eye but because the visual power goes out to what is visible; but that opinion is shown to be false by the Philosopher in his work On Sensation and the Sense Object.
Once the above account of seeing has been grasped it can readily be understood that, although a star is always uniformly bright and clear and undergoes no change except that of local movement (as is demonstrated in On the Heavens and the Earth), it can for a variety of reasons appear neither clear nor bright.
This can be caused, for instance, by the medium, which is continually changing. This medium changes from being bathed in light to being dimly lit, depending on the presence or absence of the sun. When the sun is present, the medium, which is diaphanous, is so full of light that it overwhelms the star, and makes it appear no longer bright. This medium also changes from being rare to being dense, and from being dry to being wet, on account of the vapours which are continually rising from the earth. Having itself undergone change, the medium changes the image of the star which passes through it: its density has a darkening effect and its wetness and dryness affect the colour.
The star's appearing neither clear nor bright can also be caused by the visual organ, that is, the eye, which as a result of some infection or tiredness changes by taking on a certain colouring or by becoming weak. It often happens, for instance, that because the membrane of the pupil is very bloodshot, as a result of damage caused by some infection, almost everything appears rubicund, and so the star takes on that colour.
When sight becomes weakened, a certain blurring occurs in it, so that things appear no longer firm but blurred, in much the same way as does our writing on a damp page; this is why many people when they wish to read hold the writing away from their eyes to allow the image from it to enter more smoothly and finely, so that the writing remains more distinct to their sight. In this way, too, the appearance of the star can be distorted.
I myself had personal experience of this in the same year as this canzone was conceived, because by greatly tiring my sight through devoting myself to reading I so weakened the visual spirits that all the stars appeared to me to be covered by a kind of white haze.
But through long rest in dark, cold places, and by cooling the balls of my eyes by the application of clear water, I brought the blurred power back to such firmness that I recovered my previous good eyesight. It is evident, then, from the explanations given that there are many reasons why a star can appear other than it actually is.
