O you who move the third heaven by intellection, listen to the speech in my heart; it is so strange, I can declare it to no others. The heaven that moves following your power, noble creatures that you are, draws me into my present state; hence it seems that speech about the life I experience should properly be addressed to you: so let me beg your attention. I will tell you of my heart's strange condition ‑how my sad soul weeps in it, and how a spirit disputes with her, that comes in the rays from your star.
The life of my sorrowing heart used to be a gentle thought which would often take its way to the feet of our Lord, where it saw a lady in glory of whom it would speak to me so sweetly that my soul would declare: ‘I wish to go there too.’ But now one appears who puts it to flight, and who lords it over me with such power that the trembling in my heart is made visible. This newcomer makes me look at a woman, saying: ‘Let him who would see bliss gaze into this lady's eyes, provided he does not shrink from grievous sighing.’
The humble thought that used to speak to me of an angel crowned in heaven now meets an adversary who destroys it. The soul laments, still grieving at the plight of that thought, and says: ‘Alas, how it flees, the com­passionate one who consoled me? And she, my troubled soul, says of my eyes: ‘Unlucky moment when such a woman saw them! And why did they not believe me about her? For I said: “Truly in her eyes must dwell the one who slays such as I am.” But it was no use my being alert; it did not prevent them from gazing at a woman who is such that I die of the gazing.’
‘You are not dead but only bewildered, you, our soul, who lament so much.’ Thus speaks a gentle spirit of love. ‘For that fair lady whose power you feel has so transformed your life that you are frightened ‑so faint­hearted have you become! See how compassionate and gentle she is, how wise and courteous in her greatness; and resolve to call her your lady henceforth. For unless you stray from the truth you will see the beauty of such high marvels as will cause you to say: "Love, true lord, be­hold your handmaid ‑do whatever you will."‘
My song, I think they will be few who clearly understand your meaning, so intricate and difficult is your speech. So then, if you happen to come before those who don't seem to see your meaning clearly, then I beg you, my new darling, take heart and say to them: ‘At least consider how fair I am!’