Having made clear in the preceding chapter the identity of this third heaven and the nature of its internal structure, I must now explain who these beings are who move it.
The first point to be made is that the movers of the heavens are substances independent of matter, that is, they are Intelligences, popularly known as Angels. As with the heavens, different people have held different views about these beings, although we are now in possession of the truth.
Some philosophers, including, it seems, Aristotle, believed that there were only as many Intelligences as there were revolutions in the heavens. Their reasoning was that any other Intelligences would live an eternally purposeless existence, since they would lack any activity, and this would be an impossibility, because activity constitutes the very essence of an Intelligence's being.
Others, such as Plato, a man of quite outstanding ability, held that there were not simply as many Intelligences as there were movements of the heavens, but that there were in addition as many as there were particular species of things.
They maintained that just as the Intelligences who move the heavens bring those heavens into existence, each being the source of its particular heaven, so these other Intelligences bring into existence all other things and are their exemplars, each with respect to its particular species. Plato calls them "Ideas", signifying that they are forms or universal natures.
The pagans call them gods and goddesses, although they lacked this philosophical conception of them which Plato possessed: they worshipped their images, and erected immense temples to them, as to Jupiter, for instance, whom they called the god of power, or to Pallas (otherwise known as Minerva), whom they called the goddess of wisdom, or to Vulcan, whom they called the god of fire, or to Ceres, whom they called the goddess of grain.
Clear evidence of such behaviour and of such views is found in the writings of the poets, who in certain parts of their works portray the way of life of the pagans as regards the sacrifices offered and the religious beliefs they held; clear evidence of such matters is also found in the many ancient names which survive as the names or nicknames of places and ancient buildings, as anyone who wishes can readily verify.
Although the opinions just given were derived from human reasoning, and from experience of no little weight, they still did not give an accurate account, due as much to a failure in reasoning as to a lack of instruction, for by its own powers reason can determine that the creatures spoken of above exist in far greater number than the effects which human beings can perceive.
One reason for holding this view is the following. No one, be he philosopher, pagan, Jew, Christian or member of some sect, doubts that all of these beings, or rather the greater part of them, live a life filled with complete happiness, and that those who have attained happiness enjoy a state of absolute perfection.
Since, further, human nature as it exists here on earth has not simply one but two forms of happiness, that of life passed in society and that of the contemplative life, it would be contrary to reason to hold that these beings possessed the happiness of the active or social life in virtue of their governing the universe, while lacking that of the contemplative life, which is more excellent and more divine.
Moreover, since any Intelligence which possesses the form of happiness that comes from its governing cannot possess the other form because the act of understanding of an Intelligence is single and perpetual, there must be others of their kind not engaged in this service whose life is exclusively one of contemplation.
Since, further, this latter form of life is more divine, and the more divine a thing is the more it is like God, it is clear that this life is more deeply loved by God. And if it is more deeply loved by Him, then His happiness is more lavishly bestowed on it; and if this is more lavishly bestowed on it, then He has created more beings to enjoy this form of life than the other.
The conclusion follows that these creatures exist in far greater number than those for whom we have evidence from the effects produced by them.
A second reason is that no effect is greater than its cause, since no cause can give what it does not possess. It follows that since the divine intellect is the cause of everything, and in a special way of the human intellect, this last does not surpass the divine intellect, but is, rather, immeasurably surpassed by it.
If, then, for the reasons given and for many others, we accept that God could have created spiritual creatures in virtually countless numbers, it is clear that He has in fact created a greater number of them than those for whom we have evidence. We have by no means exhausted the reasons that support this point, but these may suffice for the present.
It should cause no surprise if the reasons given, and others which we could adduce on this point, do not constitute exhaustive demonstrations, for this is itself cause for admiring the excellence of these creatures – which, as the Philosopher says, transcends what the human mind can clearly perceive – and for affirming their existence.
For despite our lacking any sense-perception of them (which is the starting point of human knowledge), a glimmer of light from their dazzling essence is nonetheless reflected in our intellect, in so far as we understand the reasons given above and many similar to them. We are like someone with his eyes closed who affirms that the air is full of light because a faint gleam or ray passes through, as it does through the pupils of a bat, for in just such a way are the eyes of our intellect closed while our soul is bound and imprisoned by the organs of our body.
