I have come to that point on the wheel when the horizon, once the sun goes down, brings forth the twinned heaven for us; and the star of love is removed from us by the shining beam which so rides across it as to veil it away; and the planet that intensifies the cold stands fully revealed to us along the great arc in which each of the seven casts the shortest shadow. And yet my mind does not shake off a single one of the thoughts of love that burden me-my mind that is harder than stone in strongly retaining an image of stone.

The pilgrim wind that darkens the air rises from the sands of Ethiopia, now heated by the sun's sphere; and crossing the sea, it brings up such quantity of cloud that, unless dispersed by another wind, the cloud-mass encloses and blocks up all our hemisphere; and then it dissolves and falls in white flakes of chill snow and dreary rain, so that all the air grows sad and weeps. And yet Love, who draws his nets aloft with the soaring wind, still does not leave me, so fair is this cruel lady who is given me as lady.

Every bird that follows the warmth has fled from the European lands which never -lose the seven freezing stars; and the rest have imposed a truce on their tongues, and will make no sound until the green season, unless it be to lament; and all the beasts that are lusty by nature are released from love, for the cold numbs their spirit. And yet my spirit is more full of love than ever; for sweet thoughts are neither taken from me, nor given, with changes of season, but a woman gives them who has lived but a short season.

The leaves brought forth by the power of the Ram to adorn the world have passed their term, and the grass is dead; branches green with leaf are taken from our sight, save in bay or pine or fir, or in other trees that retain their leaf; and so harsh and bitter is the season, it has killed the frail flowers of the field, unable to withstand the frost. And yet Love will not draw from my heart his cruel thorn; so that I am resolved to bear it ever, all life long, though I were to live for ever.

The springs spew forth fumy waters because the earth draws the gases that are in its bowels upwards from the abyss; so that a path that pleased me in fine weather is now a stream, and so will remain as long as winter's great onslaught endures; the earth has formed a crust like rock and the dead waters turn into glass because of the cold that locks them in. And yet I have not withdrawn one step from the struggle, nor will I withdraw; for if suffering be sweet, death must be sweet above all things.

My song, what will become of me in that other, that sweet young season when love, pours down to the earth from all the heavens; if love, amid all this cold, is found only in me and nowhere else? It will be with me as with a man of marble, if a girl keeps a heart of marble.





