Ample consideration has been given to the section of the text concerned with the good qualities with which the noble soul furnishes a person in maturity. It is clearly time, then, to turn our attention to the third part of the text, beginning In old age, the aim of which is to describe the qualities which the noble nature displays and must possess in the third stage of life, old age.
It declares that in old age the noble soul is prudent and just and generous, and it takes pleasure in praising excellence to the benefit of others and in hearing this done – it is, in short, affable. These four virtues are indeed most fitting in this stage. This will be apparent if we bear in mind what Cicero says in On Old Age: "Our good life pursues a definite course, and our good nature follows a single path; and at each stage of our life it is appropriate to be gifted with certain qualities."
Just as in adolescence, then, one is endowed with what is required for enabling one to come to perfection and fulfilment, so in maturity one is endowed with perfection and fulfilment in order that the sweetness of its fruit may profit both oneself and others. As Aristotle says, man is a social animal, and so it is required of him that he not only benefit himself but others too. For the same reason we read that Cato believed himself born not for his own good but that of his native country and the whole world.
Individual perfection, which is acquired in maturity, ought, therefore, to be succeeded by that perfection which sheds light not just on oneself but on others; a man should open out just like a rose which can no longer stay closed, and the scent, which has been created within, should diffuse itself abroad. This ought to take place in the third stage of life, which is the subject at hand.
A person ought, then, to be prudent, or wise. To be so he must have good recollection of the past, good knowledge of the present and good foresight regarding the future. Furthermore, as the Philosopher says in the Ethics: "It is impossible for a person to be wise if he is not good", from which it follows that anyone who makes his way by subterfuge and deceit does not deserve the name "wise"; the proper term for him is "astute". Just as no one would call a person wise on the grounds that he had expert knowledge of how to drive the tip of a dagger through the pupil of an eye, so in general a person does not deserve to be called wise on the grounds that he has expert knowledge of how to do something evil, the very doing of which always inflicts self-injury before ever it injures others.
Careful reflection reveals that it is from prudence that a person's particular good counsels derive, which guide both him and others to a successful outcome in human affairs and actions. It is this gift which Solomon requested of God when he found himself charged with the government of his people.
And anyone blessed with this prudence does not wait for someone to plead "Give me your counsel"; rather he assesses the situation for that person and offers his advice without being asked,
just as a rose does not offer its scent only to those who approach specifically for it, but to anyone who is passing. At this point some doctor or lawyer may say: "Must I, then, set about offering my counsel even to those who do not ask for it, and so deprive myself of any recompense for my professional skill?" In reply I cite the words of our Saviour: "What is freely received should be freely given."
I declare, then, my honourable legal friend, that in cases where your counsel does not involve your professional skill, and derives simply from the power of good judgment that God gave you (which is prudence, our present subject), you ought not to charge the children of the One who gave it to you; in cases involving your professional skill, you may charge for what you have paid – which is not to say that there will not be occasions when you ought rather to pay a tithe and make a gift to God, that is, to those poor wretches whose only recourse is the bounty of God.
In this stage a person ought also to be just, so that his judgments and authority may be a light and a law for others. Ancient philosophers, therefore, recognizing that this singularly important virtue (that is, justice) shone out in its perfection in old age (senectute), committed the government of the states to those whose lives were at this stage. The ruling body was accordingly called the Senate.
O wretched, wretched country of mine! How overwhelmed I am with pity for you whenever I read or write anything concerned with civil government! However, since justice will be the theme of the penultimate book of this work, the few words I have given it here may suffice for the present.
In this stage of life a person is required also to be generous, for a given quality is required of us precisely at the time that most satisfies the dictates of its nature, and at no time can we better satisfy the dictates of being generous than at this stage. If we take the trouble to reflect carefully on the argument developed by Aristotle in book IV of the Ethics, and by Cicero in On the Offices, we see that generosity can only truly be displayed if the time and place are such that a person's being generous does not harm either himself or others.
Furthermore, a person cannot ensure this unless he possess prudence and justice, and it is impossible in the normal course of nature to possess these virtues in their perfection before this stage. Alas, ill-starred and ill-begotten you are, you who despoil widows and orphans, who plunder from the most helpless, who steal and appropriate what belongs to others; making use of these very things, you then put on banquets, you make gifts of horses and weapons, goods and money, you wear splendid clothing, you build magnificent dwellings – all this in the name of generosity.
How does this differ from a thief's making off with the cloth from the altar and covering his table with it? Tyrants, in giving feasts you deserve the same ridicule as would a thief who brought guests home to a banquet, then spread over the table the cloth stolen from the altar still bearing its ecclesiastical markings, and thought that no one would notice anything.
Listen, you stubborn of heart, to the harsh words Cicero has for you in On the Offices: "There are many people who, in their eagerness to cut a fine figure and gain renown, take from one to give to another, thinking that they will be held in esteem no matter how they obtain the largesse they distribute. Nothing more contrary to how one ought to act can be imagined."
In this stage a person must also be affable, that is, he must talk about goodness, and gladly hear it spoken of, for it is commendable to talk about goodness only when there is an audience correspondingly interested. In this stage a person has a certain air of authority that suggests to people more strongly than at any earlier stage that they should listen to him; he also impresses people as being better equipped to recount interesting and uplifting stories because of his long experience of life. This lies behind Ciceros remark in On Old Age, voiced by Cato the elder: "I find that I now take greater pleasure and delight in conversing than I did when I was younger."
Ovid in his Metamorphoses instructs us that all four of these qualities are required in this stage, in the fable telling how Cephalus of Athens came to king Aeacus to seek help in Athens' war against Crete. Ovid shows that the elderly Aeacus was prudent, when he describes how, after he had lost almost all his people as a result of disease caused by impurity in the air, he wisely turned to God and asked Him to restore his dead people; and thanks to his wisdom, which led him to remain patient and made him turn to God, his people was restored to him in greater numbers than before.
He shows that he was just when he says that Aeacus divided up and distributed his desolate country among his new people. He shows that he was generous when he has Aeacus make this reply to Cephalus' request for help: "O Athens, do not ask me for help, simply take it. Do not say that you are uncertain how the forces of this island, and all that I possess, stand in regard to you. We do not lack forces, indeed we have more than enough for our needs; you face a mighty enemy, and now is certainly a propitious time for giving help, and without delay."
How richly deserving of comment this reply is! But the attentive reader will find the mere quotation of Ovid's text sufficient. The poet shows that Aeacus was affable when he describes the full and careful account he gave to Cephalus of how his people had been struck by disease and then restored.
All this makes it quite clear that four qualities are required at this stage, and that therefore the noble nature displays them then, as the text says. To drive home with greater force the example portrayed above, Ovid says of king Aeacus that he was the father of Telamon, Phocus and Peleus, and that from the first of these Ajax and Achilles were born.
