Just as in the literal explanation the text descended from general to particular praises, first those referring to the soul then those referring to the body, so now it proceeds by descending from general to particular commendations. As was said above, then, Philosophy here has wisdom as her subject matter, love as her form, and the exercise of contemplation as the composite of both. And so in this stanza which immediately follows, beginning The divine power descends into her, I intend to commend love, which is part of Philosophy.
It should be explained here that to say of something that its power descends into another thing is the same as saying that it forms that other thing into a likeness of itself. Natural agents are a case in point: we clearly observe that when their power descends into objects passive to their influence they draw those objects into similarity with themselves to the greatest extent of which they are capable.
We observe, for instance, that when the Sun sends down its rays onto this earth it forms things into a likeness of itself as regards light to the extent that they are able to receive the power of light in virtue of their disposition. So I say that God draws this love into a likeness of Himself to the extent that it is capable of being assimilated to Him. I state how it is so drawn at the words: As it does into an angel which sees Him.
Here it should further be explained that the first agent, God, imparts His power to some things by way of a direct ray, and to others by way of a reflected splendour; specifically, the divine light shines into the Intelligences without any intermediary, and is reflected onto other things from these Intelligences who have first been illuminated.
However, since I have referred here to light and splendour, I shall make my meaning perfectly clear by explaining the distinction between these terms, according to the views of Avicenna. It is the custom of philosophers to use the word "light" for luminosity as it exists in its original source; the word "ray" for this as it exists in the medium, lying between the source and the first body which it strikes; and the word "splendour" for this as it exists when reflected in some other being which has been illuminated.
I declare, then, that the divine power without any intermediary draws this love into similarity with itself. This can be shown to be the case principally from the following: since the divine love is wholly eternal, its object must of necessity be eternal, so that the beings which God loves must be eternal beings; and He causes this love to love in the same way, because wisdom on which this love strikes is eternal.
That is why of wisdom it is written: "In the beginning before all ages was I created, and in the age yet to come I shall not cease to be"; and in the Proverbs of Solomon Wisdom herself says: "From eternity was I ordained"; and at the beginning of the Gospel of John her eternity is clearly implied. And so it comes about that wherever the splendour of this love is present all other loves become dim and almost spent, because its eternal object outdoes and surpasses all other objects.
And so the most eminent philosophers gave clear evidence of this in their actions, which indicate to us that they treated with indifference everything apart from wisdom: thus Democritus, paying no attention to his appearance, cut neither his beard nor hair nor nails; Plato, paying no attention to worldly goods, treated royal dignity with indifference, son of a king though he was; Aristotle, paying no attention to any other friend, fought against his best friend except wisdom, Plato, whom we have just mentioned. But why speak of these men when we find others who, because they thought in this way, held their own lives of no account, as did Zeno, Socrates, Seneca and many others.
It is clear, then, that the divine power descends into this love in human beings as it does into an angel. To provide experience of this, the text goes on to cry out: Let any noble lady who does not believe this accompany her and observe. By noble lady is meant the noble soul which possesses intelligence and is free in virtue of its proper power, the reason.
That is why the other souls cannot be called ladies but servants, since they exist not for their own sakes but for that of something else; as the Philosopher says, something is free which exists for its own good, and not for that of something else.
I say: Let [any noble lady]... accompany her and observe her actions, that is, let her be in the company of this love, and take note of what she finds within it. I touch on what this is in part when I say: Here below whenever she speaks a spirit flows down, that is, whenever Philosophy is actually present a heavenly thought flows down, which leads the person to recognize that this is a more than human activity; and I say "from heaven" to indicate that not only Philosophy itself but the thoughts akin to it are above base and worldly matters.
The text goes on to speak of how she strengthens and enkindles love wherever she appears, by the gentleness of her activity, for all her looks are honourable, sweet and without a trace of excess. The text continues, as a further inducement to seek her company: Nobility in a woman is simply what is found in her, and beauty is nothing other than what resembles her.
To this it adds: One may say further that her countenance helps us. It should be explained here that the sight of this lady was so generously ordained for us not only that we might see her face, which she reveals to us, but also that we might desire to acquire the things which she keeps hidden from us.
Thus, just as through her we see by our reason much of what without her seems marvellous, and consequently see that that much has a cause giving it existence, so through her we believe that every miracle can have a cause in an intellect higher than our own, and consequently can exist. From this our precious faith takes its origin; from faith comes hope, the desire of what is seen to lie ahead; and from hope springs the activity of charity.
Through these three virtues men rise to philosophize in that heavenly Athens towards which, through the dawning of eternal truth, the Stoics, the Peripatetics and the Epicureans hasten together, united in the harmony of a single will.
