Now that I have securely established the definition of nobility, and, as far as possible, have explained the meaning of each of its elements, it is clear what it means to be a noble person. It seems time, then, to go on to the part of the text that begins: The soul which this goodness adorns. Here the text specifies the signs whereby one may recognize the noble person just spoken of.
This part has two sections. In the first the text affirms that this nobility shines forth and is reflected in the entire life of the noble person. In the second it describes nobility specifically in each of its various splendours; this second section begins: It is obedient, gentle and bashful.
With reference to the first section, it should be explained that this divine seed, of which we have just spoken, immediately spreads shoots in the soul, ranging and diversifying itself through all of the soul's powers, according to the needs of each. It spreads shoots through the vegetative, the sensitive and the rational powers; it branches through the various capacities of them all, directing them all towards their perfection, and sustaining itself unceasingly in them until the point comes when, together with that part of our soul which never dies, it returns to heaven and to the most exalted and glorious Sower.
This is the subject of the first section of the text. The section beginning It is obedient, gentle and bashful is concerned with showing how we may recognize the noble person in outward signs which are the activity of this divine excellence. This section has four subsections, one dealing with each of the four stages of life, in which this excellence realizes itself in different ways: youth, maturity, old age and extreme old age.
The second, third and fourth subsections begin respectively: In maturity it is temperate and strong; In old age; Finally, in the fourth phase of life. Such in general terms is the meaning of this section, regarding which it should be explained that every effect in so far as it is an effect is made similar to its cause to the highest degree of which it is capable.
Since, therefore, our life, and indeed that of every living thing here below, is caused by the heavens, and the heavens display themselves to all their effects on earth not as a complete circle but only as part of one, it follows that the movement of the heavens above these effects must be more or less like an arc. Consequently, the lives of all things on earth must reflect this by themselves having more or less the form of an arc. At present, however, I am concerned solely with human life, and my point is that the course of our life reflects this arc by taking the same form, rising to a climax and then declining.
It should be explained that the arc here below would, like its celestial counterpart, trace a perfectly even course if the matter comprising the constitutive elements sown in us did not hinder the operation of the law governing our nature. But in fact the fundamental moisture – which is where the heat that constitutes our life resides and is nourished – varies in quantity and quality and is of differing duration in different effects, with the result that the arc of life has a greater or smaller span in different people.
Furthermore, a person can suffer a violent death, or an untimely one brought about by illness. Nonetheless, popular speech quite rightly refers to a death as natural only when the term of life exemplifies the words of the psalmist: "You have put a term to our life beyond which it may not go." Aristotle, too, the supreme teacher in questions concerning our life, adverted to the arc of which we are speaking, and it was his view, apparently, that our life is simply a rising and a falling. He says, for instance, in his treatise On Maturity and Old Age that maturity is nothing other than an upward movement of our life.
It is no easy matter to determine where the high point of this arc is situated, granted the inequality just spoken of. My own view is that in most people it occurs somewhere between the ages of thirty and forty. I also believe that in those endowed with a perfect nature it occurs in the thirty-fifth year.
My reason for adopting this view is that Christ our Saviour was endowed with a supremely perfect nature, and he chose to die in his thirty-fourth year, because on the one hand it was not fitting that his divinity should be present in something that was in decline, and on the other it really is unthinkable that he should not have wished to live his life here below to its climax after experiencing the lowly condition of childhood.
Evidence for this view is found in the time of day at which he died, for he wished to make this reflect the course of his life, and we know from Luke that it was almost the sixth hour, that is, the climax of the day, when he died. We may understand from this, taking into account the word "almost", that the climax of Christ's earthly life would have occurred during his thirty-fifth year.
Indeed, the ancient writings not only differentiate within this arc by describing its midpoint; they also divide it into four parts, called four stages, corresponding to the four combinations of the contrary qualities which make up our bodily composition, each part of life being recognizably characterized by one of the combinations.
The first is youth, characterized by heat and moisture; the second is maturity, characterized by heat and dryness; the third is old age, characterized by cold and dryness; the fourth is extreme old age, characterized by cold and moisture, as Albert notes in his Meteorics.
These parts are likewise to be found in each year, in spring, summer, autumn and winter; and in each day, in the period up to Terce, then the period up to Nones (I leave aside Sext, which occurs in the middle of this period, for reasons that will become apparent), then the period up to Vespers and finally the period after Vespers. This is why the Gentiles, or pagans, said that the chariot of the sun was drawn by four horses: the first they called Eous, the second Pyroeis, the third Aethon, the fourth Philogeus.
The parts of the day merit a brief comment. As I noted above, the Church in determining how the hours of the day are to be calculated works on the basis of the seasonal day. There are twelve hours in any day, but the length of the hours varies in accordance with the varying lengths of the solar day. Since the sixth hour, or mid day, is the most noble and vibrant of the entire day, the Church sets the recitation of its offices for each period of the day, both before and after noon, as close as possible to that hour.
Terce, then, the office for the first period of the day, is recited at the end of that period, and the offices for the third and fourth periods are recited at the beginning of theirs. So people talk about being "half-way through Terce" before the bells have sounded for that period, or of being "half-way through Nones (or Vespers)" after they have sounded. Everyone, then, should know that the correct time for the bells to ring for the office of Nones is at the beginning of the seventh hour of the day. However, I have digressed enough on this topic.
