Now that I have shown how the present commentary would not have been the subject of the vernacular canzoni had it been in Latin, I must go on to show how it would not have known them closely, nor been obedient to them. That done, we shall be able to draw the conclusion that the vernacular must be used if inversions of the proper order are to be avoided.
I maintain that Latin would not have been a servant with close knowledge of its vernacular master for the following reason. For a servant to have close knowledge of his master the basic requirement is perfect knowledge of two things.
The first is the nature of his master, for there are some masters of a nature so asinine that they command the opposite of what they want done, while others want what they have in mind to be understood without their uttering a word, and others again do not want their servant to lift a finger to do what is needed without first being given the command.
What causes such variations in human nature is something I do not intend to explain here, as this would unduly lengthen the digression; I shall content myself with the general remark that such people are little better than beasts, drawing scant profit from reason. It is clear, then, that if a servant lacks close knowledge of his master’s nature he cannot offer him perfect service.
In the second place, a servant must have close knowledge of his master's friends, for otherwise he can neither honour nor serve them, nor, consequently, can he perfectly serve his master, for friends are like parts forming one whole, for they form a whole in being at one in what they will and do not will.
Nor would a commentary written in Latin have had the close knowledge of these things possessed by one written, like its subject, in the vernacular. The following clearly demonstrates that Latin lacks close knowledge of the vernacular and its friends. Whoever has a general knowledge of something does not know that thing perfectly; for instance, a person who knows from a distance that something is an animal, does not know that thing perfectly, because he cannot say whether it is a dog, a wolf or a goat.
Latin has a general and not a distinct knowledge of the vernacular, for if it had distinct knowledge of it, it would know all forms of the vernacular, since there are no grounds for its knowing one form better than another; and so anyone at all who had completely mastered Latin would possess distinct knowledge of the vernacular.
But this is not the case, for someone from Italy who has mastery of Latin cannot distinguish the vernacular of England from that of Germany; nor can someone from Germany distinguish the vernacular of Italy from that of Provence. It is clear, therefore, that Latin lacks close knowledge of the vernacular.
Furthermore, Latin lacks close knowledge of the vernacular's friends, since it is impossible to know a person's friends closely without first knowing closely that person himself. Granted what was demonstrated above, then, that Latin does not have close knowledge of the vernacular, it is impossible for it to have close knowledge of the vernacular's friends.
Moreover, it is impossible to know people closely without some personal acquaintance or familiarity with them; and Latin is not personally acquainted with as many people who make up a given linguistic group as is the vernacular spoken by them, of which they are all friends. Consequently, Latin cannot have close knowledge of the friends of the vernacular.
This argument would not be invalidated were someone to point out that Latin is undoubtedly personally acquainted with some of the vernacular's friends, for this does not mean that it is familiar with them all; it does not, therefore, know the vernacular's friends perfectly. But for the close knowledge of which we have been speaking, what is required is perfect, not partial knowledge.
