Returning to the beginning again, as our plan requires, I declare that this lady is the lady of the intellect, who is called Philosophy. However, since praise of someone naturally evokes a desire to know the person praised – and to know something is to be aware of what that thing is, considered in itself and with respect to all it causes, as the Philosopher says; and since that cannot be made clear by the name of the thing, although such is what the name signifies, as he also indicates, where he says that a definition consists of the meaning signified by the name – I must indicate here, before continuing further with her praises, what it is that is called Philosophy, that is, what it is that is signified by this name.
Once that has been made clear, greater benefit will be reaped from discussion of the present allegory. I shall first indicate who originally coined this name, and then go on to explain its significance.
I declare, then, that in antiquity in Italy, shortly after the founding of Rome, which took place approximately 750 years before the coming of our Saviour, and roughly contemporary with Numa Pompilius, second king of the Romans, there lived a most noble philosopher called Pythagoras. Before his time people who pursued knowledge were called not philosophers but wise men,
as were, for instance, those seven sages of remote antiquity whose renown has kept their names alive to this day: Solon, Chilon, Periander, Cleobulus, Lindius, Bias and Pirenus.
When Pythagoras was asked whether he considered himself a wise man, he refused to be described by this term and declared himself to be not a wise man but a lover of wisdom. From this there arose the custom of calling anyone devoted to wisdom "a lover of wisdom", that is, "a philosopher", for the Greek word "philos" is the equivalent of "love" in our language and so we say "philos" signifying "love" and "sophia" signifying "wisdom". It is clear, then, that these two words make up one term "philosopher", which is equivalent to "a lover of wisdom"; one may note, therefore, that it is a term indicative not of arrogance but of humility.
From this comes the word for the activity proper to such a person, philosophy, just as from "friend" comes the word for the activity proper to him, namely, friendship. It is clear, then, from consideration of the meaning of these two words that philosophy is nothing other than a love of wisdom or of knowledge; and so in a certain sense everyone may be called "a philosopher" on account of the natural love generated in everyone by the desire to know.
However, since the emotions pertaining to man's essence are common to all mankind, we do not speak of them by using a word which is distinctive only of some of those who share in that essence. For instance, we do not say that John is a friend of Martin when we intend to refer to the natural friendship which makes us all friends of all other men, but do so when referring to the friendship which arises over and above natural friendship and is proper to and distinctive of particular individuals. We do not, therefore, call someone a philosopher on account of the love for knowledge which is common to all.
Moreover, in Aristotle's view, put forward in the eighth book of the Ethics, the word friend designates someone whose friendship is not hidden from the person he loves and to whom the person he loves is also a friend, so that goodwill exists on both sides; and this must come about from motives either of gain, or of pleasure or of integrity. Consequently, for someone to be a philosopher, there must be love for wisdom, whereby goodwill exists on one side; there must be devotion and care, whereby goodwill is evoked on the other side, too, so that intimacy and the demonstration of goodwill arise between the two. So when love and devotion are lacking a person cannot be called a philosopher: both of these must be present.
And just as friendship which is motivated either by pleasure or by gain is not truly friendship, but is such only incidentally (as is shown in the Ethics), so also philosophy which is motivated by pleasure or by gain is not truly philosophy, but is such only incidentally. No one is to be called a philosopher, then, who for the sake of some pleasure is a friend of one aspect or another of wisdom, as are many who take pleasure in listening to canzoni and in being students of them, or who take pleasure in being students of Rhetoric or Music, while shunning and neglecting the other sciences, which all form part of wisdom.
Nor does he deserve to be called a true philosopher who is a friend of wisdom for the sake of gain, as are lawyers, doctors and almost all religious, who study not in order to become wise but in order to acquire money or rank; were anyone to give them what they are bent on acquiring, their studying would cease forthwith.
And just as among the kinds of friendship that which is motivated by gain has least claim to be called friendship, so the people just spoken of are less worthy of the name of philosopher than all the others. For just as friendship formed on account of integrity is true and perfect and eternal, so philosophy is true and perfect when it comes into being on account of integrity alone, with no consideration for anything else, and on account of the goodness of the friend's soul, a goodness consisting of right love and right reason.
One may say here then, finally, that as true friendship between human beings exists when each person loves the whole of the other person, so the true philosopher loves his wisdom in its entirety, and wisdom loves the philosopher in his entirety, in that she draws him wholly to herself and allows no thought of his to stray elsewhere. That is why Wisdom herself says, in the Proverbs of Solomon, "I love those who love me."
And just as friendship, taken as something distinct from the mind, and considered simply in itself, has knowledge of good activity as its subject and love for such activity as its form, so philosophy, as something other than the soul, and considered in itself, has understanding as its subject and an almost divine love for what is understood as its form. Further, just as the efficient cause of true friendship is virtue, so the efficient cause of philosophy is truth;
and just as the goal of true friendship is worthy pleasure, which issues from living together according to what is specifically human, that is, according to reason (as Aristotle clearly holds), so the goal of philosophy is that most excellent pleasure which does not suffer from any interruption or flaw, that is, true happiness, which is attained by contemplation of the truth.
So now at last it is clear who is this lady of mine, through consideration of all her causes and of her essence, and why she is called Philosophy, and who is truly a philosopher and who is such only incidentally.
However, a certain fervour of mind sometimes leads us to refer to the source of our actions and the object of our emotions by the word for the action or passion itself (as Virgil does in the Aeneid, where, in the person of Aeneas, he addresses Hector as follows: "O light" – which is an action, and "O hope of the Trojans" – which is an emotion, while Hector in fact was neither light nor hope but the source from whom the light of counsel came to them, and the object in whom they placed their entire hope of safety: and as Statius does in the Thebaid, when Hypsipyle says to Archemorus: "O consolation for the loss of our possessions and of our fatherland, O honour of the service I render"; we likewise in everyday speech will say, when pointing out a friend, "my friendship", and a father says to his son, "my love"). And so by long established custom those sciences which are the object of Philosophy's most fervent gaze are called by her name, as are, for instance, Physics, Ethics and Metaphysics – this last being called First Philosophy, since it is the object to which her gaze is drawn most irresistibly and with the greatest fervour.
It is evident, then, how in a secondary sense the sciences are called Philosophy.
Now that it is clear what is the essence of Philosophy in its primary and original form – and this is the lady of whom I am speaking – and how her noble name is by custom extended to the sciences, I shall continue further with her praises.
