Since it often happens that even human activities do not to human eyes have any intelligible pattern, it is scarcely to be wondered at if divine providence, whose depths can never be plumbed by angelic or human intelligence, frequently unfolds in ways that are hidden to us. It is, rather, something truly wonderful when the realization of the eternal plan unfolds so clearly that our reason discerns that plan.
In beginning this chapter, I may, then, make my own the words of Solomon when he says in Proverbs through the mouth of Wisdom: "Listen to me, for the words I must speak are charged with significance."
When God in his boundless goodness wished to refashion the human creature into a likeness of Himself once again, after it had separated itself from Him and deformed itself through the first man's sin of transgression, it was decided in that most lofty and united court of the Trinity that the Son of God would come down to earth to effect that harmony.
Since for His coming the universe, earth as well as heaven, had to be most perfectly disposed – and earth is most perfectly disposed – when it is a monarchy (that is, subject in its entirety to one ruler, as explained above) – it was decreed by divine providence which people and which city should bring this about, namely, glorious Rome.
Since, too, the dwelling into which the divine king was to enter had to be quite pure and spotless, it was decreed that there be a family-line of the highest sanctity, into which, after it had boasted many members of great virtue, would be born a woman surpassing all others, who would be the resting place of the Son of God. This was the line of David, from whom was born the joy and glory of the human race, Mary. As is written in the prophet Isaiah: "A shoot shall spring from the root of Jesse, and from his root a flower shall blossom." It was at one and the same time that there took place the birth of David and the birth of Rome – that is, the arrival of Aeneas in Italy from Troy, this being the event from which the city of Rome took its origin, as the ancient writings testify. The fact that the birth of the holy city was contemporaneous with the origin of Mary's line makes it perfectly clear that the Roman empire was willed by God.
It should be noted in parenthesis that from the time the heavens began their circling of the earth they were never in a more favourable disposition than when the one who created and governs them descended from above, as those skilled in the mathematical arts can demonstrate to this day.
The world, too, was never so perfectly disposed, nor will it ever be so again, than when its affairs were directed by one voice alone, that of the ruler and commander of the Roman people, as Luke the evangelist records. And since universal peace reigned throughout the world, something which has never occurred again and never will, the ship of human society sped directly along on a journey full of pleasure toward its destined port.
O ineffable and unfathomable wisdom of God, who for Your own coming prepared so far ahead at one and the same time up there in Syria and here in Italy! O most stupid and base of beasts pasturing in the guise of human beings, who are so arrogant as to speak against our faith; with your fine-spun theorizing and laboured investigations you wish to find causes for what God has determined with such wisdom! A curse on you and your arrogance, and on all who pay you heed.
At the end of the preceding chapter I proposed that Rome was specially favoured by God not only in its birth but also in its growth. Put briefly, my contention is that the growth of Rome, from the time of its founding father, Romulus, until the age of its highest perfection, under the above-mentioned emperor, was the result of divine, not merely human, activity.
Consider the seven kings who first governed Rome, namely, Romulus, Numa, Tullus, Ancus and the three Tarquinii, who acted as her guardians and tutors in her infancy; as we can learn from the histories of Rome, all had different gifts suited to the requirements of the passing years.
Consider the period stretching from the time when her late adolescence allowed her to be emancipated from royal tutelage, that is, from the first consul, Brutus, right up until her first supreme ruler, Caesar: we find that she was favoured with citizens who were not human but divine, inspired in their love for her by a love not human but divine. All this can only be explained or justified by the fact that God had a special end in view when He so lavishly infused heavenly power.
Who will say it was without divine inspiration that Fabricius refused an almost infinite sum of gold, because he did not wish to abandon his native land? or that Curius, when the Samnites tried to bribe him, refused the offer of a massive quantity of gold out of love for his native land, declaring that the Romans wished to possess not gold but those who owned it? or that Mucius thrust his own hand into the fire, because his plan to liberate Rome by a single blow had failed?
Who will say of Torquatus, when he condemned to death his only son for the sake of the public good, that he underwent this without being sustained by divine help? does the same not hold of Brutus mentioned above? Who will say this of the Decii and the Drusi, who laid down their lives for their native land? Who will say that the captive Regulus was moved only by human and not by divine nature when, dispatched from Carthage to Rome to exchange the Carthaginian prisoners for himself and the other Roman prisoners, he gave his advice (once the Carthaginian delegation had withdrawn) based on love of Rome and against his own best interests?
Who will say this of Quinctius Cincinnatus, who, after he was taken from behind his plough and made dictator, of his own free will refused to continue in office and returned to his plough when his period of duty ended? Who will say that it was without divine initiative that Camillus, after being banished and cast into exile, returned to liberate Rome from its enemies, only to go back into exile of his own free will after he had done this, in order not to violate the authority of the senate?
O Cato, most sacred figure, who would presume to speak of you? The best way to speak of you is indeed to be silent, and to follow Jerome's example in his introduction to the Bible, where, with reference to Paul, he declares that it is better to be silent than to say little.
It ought to be clear beyond doubt, when one recalls the lives of these and other divine citizens, that so many wonderful actions did not occur without the natural goodness of these men being enhanced in some measure by light from the divine goodness. It must be clear, too, that these thoroughly excellent men were instruments whereby divine providence favoured the growth of the Roman empire, in which God is often seen to have intervened powerfully.
Did not God Himself put His hand to the task at the outset when the Albans fought with the Romans for territorial supremacy, and the freedom of Rome was at the disposal of a single Roman? Did not God Himself put His hand to the task when the Franks, after capturing the whole of Rome, were on the point of capturing the Capitol by stealth under cover of darkness, when the mere cackling of a goose signalled their presence?
Did not God Himself put His hand to the task when the Romans, after losing so many citizens in the war against Hannibal that three bushels of rings were taken to Africa, would have abandoned their land, had that blessed man Scipio, young as he was, not set out for Africa to ensure Rome's freedom? Did not God Himself put His hand to the task when Cicero, a new citizen of lowly condition, defended Rome's freedom against Catiline, a citizen of the highest rank? Indeed he did!
No further evidence is needed to show that the birth and growth of the holy city were unique, according to God's plan and providence. I have no hesitation in saying that the very stones that make up its walls are worthy of reverence, and that the soil on which it stands is worthy of praise and gratitude beyond anything we normally deem proper for what is purely human.
