In the previous chapter I demonstrated that every moral virtue springs from a single source, that is, the capacity of choice habitually exercised for good. This is the subject of the text up to the part beginning: I affirm also that to ascribe nobility to someone.
The text continues by explaining, by means of a probable proof, that all of the above virtues, whether taken individually or as a single genus, come from nobility as effect from cause. The proof rests on a philosophical proposition that runs: when there are two things that have a common property, both must derive from some third thing, or one derive from the other, as effect from cause, for it is possible for only one thing to possess a property independently, simply in virtue of its own distinctive being. If it were not the case that both were the effect of some third thing, or one the effect of the other, then both would possess that property independently, simply in virtue of their distinctive being, which is impossible.
The text, then, says that nobility and the virtue just described (moral virtue) have the common property that each is a ground for praising anyone of whom they are predicated. Such is the meaning of the text where it says: They must both, therefore, share a common property that produces an identical effect, namely, that the person of whom they are predicated is praised and held in esteem. It concludes, on the strength of the above proposition, that one must come from the other or both from some third thing.The text then adds that if it is clear that one of these things contains the good of which the other consists and more besides, then one ought to presume that the latter comes from the former rather than that both come from some third thing. This is the meaning of the words: But if one of the two includes the good of which the other consists.
It must be explained that the method of argument used here is not that of necessary demonstration, but rather of the following kind: if cold generates water, and we see clouds generating water, then (we conclude) cold generates clouds. The method employed is, then, that of pleasing and appropriate induction, along these lines: if in us there are several things deserving of praise, and in us there exists the source of any praise we may deserve, it is reasonable to hold that these things deserving praise originate in that source; and we must say that it is more reasonable to regard whatever itself contains several things as being the source of those things than to regard those as being the source of that thing.
For just as the trunk of a tree which contains all the other branches must be held to be the source and cause of these branches, and not these the source of the trunk, so nobility, which contains all the virtues and many other praiseworthy characteristics, as a cause contains its effect, must be held to be such that virtue is to be regarded as originating from it rather than from some third thing in us.
The text says, finally, that all that has been said up to this point is to be taken as presupposed, that is, is specifically designed to be the premise of the argument that follows. This concludes the stanza and the present part.
