As I said above, the imperfection of riches can be recognized not only in the fact that their acquisition is fortuitous, but also in the fact that their increase carries many dangers. Since their deficiency is more apparent in the latter, it is only this that the text mentions, saying of riches that no matter how abundantly amassed they not only do not still people's desire, but make them thirst the more and leave them more unfulfilled and more unsatisfied.
It should be explained here that defective things are of two kinds: either their defects are disguised on the surface, and their imperfection conceals itself under the mask of perfection; or their defects are fully open to view, and their imperfection is undisguisedly apparent even on the surface.
Things whose defects are not immediately evident are the more dangerous, since we often cannot be on our guard against them. In this they are like a traitor: on the surface he has every appearance of being a friend and so gains our trust, yet under the mask of friendship he hides the defect of being our enemy. It is in this way that riches as they increase are dangerously deficient, for in so doing they lay aside their promises and bring the very opposite.
These false traitors promise that if they are amassed to a certain amount they will make the person who does this fully satisfied in every way; and by making this promise, they entice the human will into the vice of avarice. That is why Boethius in his book On Consolation charges them with being dangerous when he says: "Ah me! who first dug up the heaps of gold that lay covered, and the stones that wished to remain hidden, precious dangers that they are?"
Anyone who looks at them closely can see how these false traitors promise to take away whatever thirst or lack one has, and to bring complete satisfaction and fulfilment. Riches say this to everyone at the outset, declaring that the promise will be fulfilled when they have been increased to a certain quantity. When this is reached, instead of bringing satisfaction and refreshment of spirit, they do nothing less than set up an unbearable, feverish thirst in the person's breast; instead of bringing fulfilment, they set up a new goal, namely, desire for a greater amount, and, along with this, great fear and anxiety regarding what has already been acquired. It is certainly true that they do not still people's desire, but rather bring anxiety, which was not present before.
And so we find Cicero in his book On Paradox denouncing riches as follows: "Never at any time, I know, have I said that their money, magnificent homes, riches, power, or amusements (to which they are most strongly bound) are to be reckoned part of what is good and desirable. For I myself have seen people who possessed these in abundance crave above all the very things they have in abundance. So the thirst of cupidity is never quenched or satisfied. Nor are such people tormented only by the desire to increase things they already have; the fear of losing these is also a source of torment."
These are Cicero's very words, there for anyone to read in the book mentioned above. As further evidence of this imperfection, look at what Boethius says in his book On Consolation: "Even if the goddess of wealth were to lavish gifts as plentiful as the grains of sand rolled by a wind-tossed sea, or as the number of stars that shine, the human race would not cease to wail."
Since it is appropriate to bring further evidence that will give certain proof on this point, let us pass over all that Solomon and his father cry in protest against riches; all that Seneca, all that Horace, all that Juvenile and, in short, all that every writer, every poet, and the inerrant Scriptures themselves call out against these deceitful prostitutes, full of defects of every kind. Let us, rather, base our belief on the evidence of our own eyes, simply by taking a good look at those who run after them, and seeing how securely they live once they have amassed their store of riches, how content they are, how much they are at peace.
What else, day after day, endangers and destroys cities, regions, individuals so much as yet another amassing of wealth by someone? This very amassing releases further desires, which cannot be satisfied without someone paying the price. What else are the two branches of law, canon and civil, designed to remedy if not the damage done by cupidity, which grows with the very amassing of wealth?
One need only read the opening words of the books which contain each of these two branches of the law for this to be perfectly plain. How clear it is, clear as the day, that in their increase riches are totally imperfect, since nothing but imperfection can spring from them, no matter in what quantity they are gathered! This is the point made in the text.
Here, however, a difficulty arises that brings into doubt what has been said, one of sufficient importance to require being posed and resolved before we go on. Someone intent on obscuring the truth might say: if riches are imperfect and therefore base, in virtue of the fact that desire for them grows as they are acquired, then, by the same token, knowledge is imperfect and base, since desire for it always grows as it is acquired. Seneca speaks in this vein: "Were I to have one foot in the grave, I should still want to be learning."
However, it is not true that knowledge is base through imperfection. Since, therefore, growth in desire does not in this case entail imperfection, nor consequently, baseness, it is not the cause of baseness in the case of riches either. The Philosopher makes it clear in Ethics VI that knowledge is something perfect, where he says that knowledge is the perfect grasp of matters that are necessarily true.
This difficulty requires only a brief response. But before giving this, we must examine whether it is true, as is asserted in the difficulty posed, that our desire for knowledge expands as knowledge is acquired, and whether, if it does, there is a good reason for its so doing. In reply I maintain that not only in the acquisition of knowledge and riches, but in the acquisition of anything, human desire broadens out, although in very different ways. And there is a good reason for this, as I shall now explain.
The highest desire in every being, and the first implanted in it by nature, is the desire to return to its first cause. Since, further, God is the first cause of our souls, and creates them in His own likeness, the soul desires first and foremost to return to Him.
And just as a pilgrim travelling along a road on which he has never before set foot believes every house he sees is the hostel, and, when he, finds that it is not, transfers this belief onto the next house, and the next, and the next, until he does come to the hostel, so with our soul. As soon as it starts out along the new, quite untravelled road of this life, the soul is always on the look-out for its ultimate goal, the highest good; and so whenever it sees anything in which some good appears, it thinks that it is that highest good.
Since its judgment is at first imperfect, being as yet unschooled either by experience or by instruction, goods of little value seem to it to be of great value, and so it first begins to desire by setting its heart on them. So we see small children desiring above all else an apple; then, when they are somewhat older, desiring a little bird; then, still later, desiring fine clothes; then a horse; then a woman; then riches in small measure; then riches in large measure; then even more riches. This happens because people find in none of these things what they are actually seeking, and think they will find it a little way on.
It may be gathered from this that, from the viewpoint of our soul, each desirable object stands in front of another in pyramid form, so to speak, so that the smallest, coming first, covers all the others, and is, as it were, the apex of the ultimate desirable object, God, who constitutes the base of all the others. So the farther one progresses towards the base, the greater are the desirable objects that appear; that is why, too, human desires successively broaden their scope when they gain their object.
It must be said that some people through error wander from the right path on this journey, just as they do when making journeys in the purely physical sense. For just as when someone wants to go from one city to another there is, of necessity, one road that is the best and most direct, and another that always increases the distance from one's goal (tee road that goes in the opposite direction), and a host of others, some increasing the distance less quickly, others bringing the goal nearer less quickly, so, too, in human life there are various paths: one that is absolutely right, another that is absolutely wrong and others that are right or wrong to a greater or lesser extent.
And just as the road going straight to the city fulfils the traveller's desire and brings him rest after his effort, and the road that goes in the opposite direction never fulfils his desire and cannot bring him rest, so, too, in our life. The person who takes the right path reaches his goal and finds rest; the person who makes an error never reaches his goal: his mind wears itself out with effort as he fixes his greedy eyes unceasingly on what lies ahead.
Although the present argument does not fully answer the difficulty posed above, it does at least lay the ground for the reply, by showing that our desires as they unfold do not all broaden out in the same way. Since, however, this chapter has become somewhat extended, it is better to devote a new chapter to resolving the difficulty. There I shall bring to a conclusion the argument against riches with which I am at present concerned.
