Returning to the main theme, I declare that in the stanza beginning The humble thought which used to speak my aim is to convey what my soul said within me, that is, what the old thought said against the new. I first explain briefly the cause of its plaintive words, when I say: The humble thought which used to speak to me of an angel crowned in heaven finds in this one a fatal adversary. These words are spoken by that particular thought regarding which I said above that my sorrowing heart used to draw its life from it.
When I go on to say: The soul laments, so keenly does it sorrow still over that thought, I explain that my soul is still on the side of the former, and speaks with sadness; it bewails its plight, as if marvelling at the sudden change, where it says: What sorrow is mine: how she flees, this compassionate one who has consoled me! Well may it say consoled, for when my soul suffered its great loss this thought which would mount to heaven brought it deep consolation.
I then say that my innermost thought, that is, my soul (spoken of here as this wearied one), rose to its own defence, and inveighed against my eyes; I describe this at the words: Of my eyes this wearied one says.
My soul has three things to say about my eyes, three charges to lay against them. In the first place, it curses the hour when this lady saw them. Here it should be explained that although several things can enter the eye at one time, it is in fact whatever comes along a straight line into the very tip of the pupil that is truly seen, and that alone which imprints itself on the imagination.
The reason for this is that the nerve, along which the visual power travels, faces in that direction; so in fact one eye cannot look at another eye without being seen by it, for just as the eye which gazes receives the form into its pupil from along a straight line, so its form goes out along that same line into the eye on which it is gazing. And often when eyes are directed along this particular line an arrow is let fly by him who makes light work of every defence. So when I say that this lady saw them this is the same as saying that her eyes and mine looked into each other.
In the second place, it reproaches them with disobedience, at the words: O why would they not heed what I said of her? It then goes on to make the third point, saying that it ought not to blame itself, for some lack of foresight, but them, for failing to obey, for it declares that it would say from time to time, speaking of this lady: "In her eyes there would certainly be a power I could not withstand, were the way left open for her." It says this at the words: I told them: "Without a doubt, in her eyes ...".
There should not be the slightest doubt that my soul recognized that its disposition was such as to be readily affected by the influence of this lady, and that for this very reason it went in fear of her, for the influence of any agent produces its effect in a subject which is disposed to receive it, as the Philosopher says in On the Soul. So if a piece of wax had the capacity to fear, it would have greater fear than would a stone of being exposed to the sunlight, since the disposition of wax is such as to be more powerfully affected thereby.
The soul's words explain finally that its eyes' insouciance had brought on the danger, when it says: But it did me no good to be aware of this: they went straight ahead and gazed on her, and have thereby caused my death; in saying they gazed on her, it refers to the one whom it had earlier described as the one who kills all such as me. On this note it draws its words to a close; to them the new thought responds, as will be recounted in the following chapter.
