It is a precept of moral philosophers who have spoken on how to bring benefit to others that in so doing we ought to put thought and care into ensuring that what we offer is as helpful as possible to the recipient. I wish to obey this instruction, and so I strive to the best of my ability to make each and every part of my Banquet helpful.
Since this particular part gives me occasion to speak of human happiness, I intend to say something about the sweetness it brings, because for those who are unacquainted with it there is no more helpful subject on which I could speak. As both the Philosopher and Cicero say, no one can shoot well at a target he does not see; similarly, no one can well direct his energies towards attaining this sweetness unless he has first been informed where it lies.
Since this is that final peace which is the goal of our entire life and of our every action, there is nothing more helpful or more necessary to us than to see this target, so that we may take aim at it with the bow of our activity. And no one is more deserving of thanks than the person who points this out to those who do not know where to look.
Leaving aside, then, the views held on this topic by the philosopher Epicurus, and by Zeno, I intend straightaway to put forward the true view, held by Aristotle and the other Peripatetics. As was said above, the divine excellence which is sown in us and infused into us at the very beginning of our life puts forth a shoot, called hormen in Greek, meaning the natural desire of the mind.
Now we know that crops have a certain resemblance to each other at the beginning of their life, when they all appear to be a species of grass, but that gradually they manifest their dissimilarity as the process of growth continues. Similarly with this natural desire that springs from divine grace: at first it gives the appearance of being no different from the desire that originates purely and simply from nature; as happens with forms of grass that are in fact crops of different kinds, the first kind of desire resembles the others. There is a resemblance not only among men, but even between men and beasts; this is seen in the fact that every animal as soon as it is born, be it rational or brute, both loves itself, and fears and shuns things that are inimical to it – in short, hates them.
As indicated above, the dissimilarity begins to appear among the desires in the course of their development in which one takes one path, another another path and so on. The words of the Apostle are apt here, "Though many take part in the race for the crown, only one gains it", for these human desires from the outset go their way along different paths, and yet there is only one path that leads us to our peace. This being so, I shall in this treatise leave aside consideration of all other desires, and simply describe the course taken by the desire that sets out on the right path.
From the beginning, then, it loves itself, though at first without discrimination. Then it learns to distinguish between what is more lovable to it and what is less so, what is more hateful and less so, and, correspondingly, seeks or shuns those things, according as its knowledge discriminates not only among things outside itself, which it loves secondarily, but even within itself, which it loves in the first place.
Recognizing different parts within itself, it loves more those that are more noble. And since the mind is a more noble part of man than the body, it loves that more. Since, then, it loves itself in the first place, and other things for the sake of itself, and within itself loves its more excellent part more, it is clear that it loves its mind more than its body or anything else – and in so doing follows the law of nature by which it ought to love the mind more than anything else.
It follows that if the mind always takes delight in actively employing whatever it loves (this being the fruit of love), and actively employing what is most loved is our greatest delight, then actively employing our mind is our greatest delight. And whatever is our greatest delight is identical with our happiness and our bliss, beyond which there is no greater delight, and with which nothing even bears comparison. This will be apparent to anyone who has closely followed the previous discussion.
Here I must guard against a misinterpretation. I am not saying that any and every desire qualifies as mind; by mind here I refer solely to that desire which pertains to the rational part, that is, to the will and the intellect. So it would be out of place and quite impermissible for anyone to apply the term "mind" to sensual desire, for the rational desire is undoubtedly more noble than the sensual, and is, accordingly, more lovable. It is, then, rational desire that I am discussing. It is important to realize that our mind has two kinds of activity, practical and contemplative. (The word practical here has the force of "effecting something".) 
In each of these we experience delight of the highest order, though this is more true of contemplative activity, as noted above. Activity of the practical kind consists in effecting things virtuously through our own power, or, in other words, effecting things with integrity, that is, with prudence, temperance, fortitude and justice; activity of the contemplative kind consists not in bringing anything into effect by our own power, but in studying what is effected by God and by nature. It should be apparent, then, that it is in these two activities that we find bliss or supreme happiness. And it is to this sweetness that the seed we have spoken of is directed, as I need hardly emphasize. Often this seed does not attain to that sweetness, either because it is poorly cultivated or because its shoots grow awry.
Conversely, such an end can be attained by dint of constant redirection and cultivation, for anyone into whom this seed did not descend at the beginning of life can make it part of himself during the course of his development, so that he does attain this fruit. This process may be described as the engrafting of a new nature onto something whose root is of a different kind. There is, then, no excuse for anyone: if a man's natural root leaves him bereft of this seed, he can obtain it by way of engrafting. I only wish that those who have in fact performed such self-engrafting were as numerous as those who allow themselves to stray from the direction set by their good root.
Furthermore, of the two activities mentioned one brings happiness more fully than the other. I am, of course, speaking of contemplative activity. This is in pure form the activity of our most noble part, that is, the intellect, which the root love spoken of draws us to love as what is most lovable in us. This part cannot in this life attain the truly perfect exercise of its activity, which would be to see God, the highest object of the intellect, face to face; here the nearest one can come to this is to reflect on Him and perceive Him through His effects.
The Gospel of Mark, if we pay it close attention, instructs us that we should seek this form of happiness as supreme, and not the other, that to be found in the active life. Mark recounts that Mary Magdalene, Mary the mother of James and Mary Salome went to the tomb in search of the Saviour, but failed to find him. They found instead a young man dressed in white, who told them: "You are looking for the Saviour, but I tell you that he is not here. So do not be afraid; go, rather, and tell his disciples and Peter that he will go ahead of them into Galilee. Here you will see him as he told you."
These three women may be taken to represent the three schools who made the active life their concern, namely, the Epicureans, Stoics and Peripatetics. They go to the tomb, that is, the present world, the domain of things that pass away, and seek the Saviour, that is, happiness, but fail to find it. They find instead a young man dressed in white, who, we learn from Matthew and the other evangelists, was an angel of God. As Matthew said: "The angel of God descended from heaven, came and rolled back the stone, and seated himself on it. His face shone like lightning and his clothes like snow."
This angel is our nobility, which comes from God, as we have seen; it speaks in our reason and it tells each one of these schools, that is, anyone who is in search of happiness in the active life, that happiness is not here. Go rather, it says, and tell the disciples and Peter – that is, those who are looking for him and those who have gone astray (as Peter did, when he denied knowing him) – that he will go ahead of us in contemplation – symbolized by Galilee.
The word Galilee means whiteness. Whiteness is a colour more charged with material light than any other; contemplation, likewise, is more charged with spiritual light than anything else whatever here below. Note that the text says "He will go ahead of you", and not "He will be with you", signifying that in contemplation God always lies ahead of us, and that it is beyond our power here ever to attain to His presence, which is what constitutes our supreme bliss. It continues: "Here you will see him as he told you", which means: here below you will attain such measure of sweetness (or happiness) as has been promised you here, that is, such measure as has been determined that you are capable of attaining.
We may conclude, then, with respect to bliss in this life (which is the happiness with which I am at present concerned), that it can be attained in its imperfect form in the active life, that is, in the realization of the moral virtues, and then in its perfect form in a loose sense in the realization of the intellectual virtues. These two modes of activity are the quickest and most direct ways leading to supreme happiness, which we cannot attain here, as is by now apparent from the above discussion.
