I had arrived where I could hear the distant roar 

of water falling to the lower circle, 

like the rumbling hum of bees around a hive,     

when three shades at a run

broke from a passing crowd

under that rain of bitter torment.  

Together they came toward us, each calling:

'Stop, you, who by your garb appear to be

a man from our degenerate city.'  

Oh, what sores I noticed on their limbs,

both old and new ones, branded by the flames!

It pains me still, when I remember them.

My teacher was attentive to their cries,

then turned his face to me and said:

'Now wait: to these one must show courtesy.

'And were it not for the fire that the nature

of this place draws down, I would say

haste befits you more than it does them.'

When we stopped, they took up again

their old refrain, but once they reached us

all three had joined into a single wheel.

As combatants, oiled and naked, are wont to do,

watching for their hold and their advantage,

before the exchange of thrusts and blows,

wheeling, each fixed his eyes on me,

so that their feet moved forward

while their necks were straining back.

One began: 'If the squalor of this shifting sand

and our blackened, hairless faces

put us and our petitions in contempt,

'let our fame prevail on you

to tell us who you are, who fearless

move on living feet through Hell.

'He in whose steps you see me tread,

though he go naked, peeled hairless by the fire,

was of a higher rank than you imagine.

'He was grandson of the good Gualdrada.

Guido Guerra was his name.  In his life

he did much with good sense, much with the sword.

'This other, squinching sand behind me,

is Tegghiaio Aldobrandi, whose voice

deserved a better welcome in the world.

'And I, who am put to torment with them,

was Jacopo Rusticucci.  It was my bestial wife,

more than all else, who brought me to this pass.'

Had I been sheltered from the fire

I would have thrown myself among them,

and I believe my teacher would have let me.

But because I would have burned and baked,

fright overcame the good intentions

that made me hunger to embrace them.

Then I began: 'Not contempt, but sadness,

fixed your condition in my heart so deep -- 

it will be long before it leaves me -- 

'the moment that my master's words

made me consider that such worthy men

as you were coming near.

'I am of your city.  How many times

I've heard your deeds, your honored names resound!

And I, too, named you with affection.

'I leave bitterness behind for the sweet fruits

promised by my truthful leader.

But first I must go down into the very core.'

'That your spirit may long quicken

your limbs,' he replied once more, 

'and your renown shine after you,

'tell us if valor and courtesy still live

there in our city, as once they used to do,

or have they utterly forsaken her?

'Guglielmo Borsiere, grieving with us here

so short a time, goes yonder with our company

and makes us worry greatly with his words.'

'The new crowd with their sudden profits

have begot in you, Florence, such excess

and arrogance that you already weep.'

This, my face uplifted, I cried out.  And the three,

taking it for answer, looked at one another

as men do when they face the truth.

'If at other times it costs so little

for you to give clear answers,' they replied in turn,

'happy are you to speak so free.

'Therefore, so may you escape from these dark regions

to see again the beauty of the stars,

when you shall rejoice in saying "I was there,"

'see that you speak of us to others.'

Then they broke their circle and as they fled

their nimble legs seemed wings.

'Amen' could not have been said as quickly

as they vanished.  And then my master

thought it time to leave.

I followed him, and we had not gone far

before the roar of water was so close

we hardly could have heard each other speak.

As the river that is the first to hold

its course from Monte Viso eastward

on the left slope of the Apennines,

and up there is called the Acquacheta,

before it pours into its lower bed

and, having lost that name at Forlì,

reverberates above San Benedetto

dell'Alpe, falling in one cataract

where there might well have been a thousand,

so, down from a precipitous bank, the flood

of that dark water coming down resounded

in our ears and almost stunned us.

I had a cord around my waist,

with which I once had meant to take

the leopard with the painted pelt.

After I had undone it,

as my leader had commanded,

I gave it to him coiled and knotted.  

Then, swinging round on his right side,

he flung it out some distance from the edge,

down into the depth of that abyss.

'Surely,' I said to myself, 'something new

and strange will answer this strange signal

the master follows with his eye.'

Ah, how cautious we should be with those

who do not see our actions only,

but with their wisdom peer into our thoughts!

He said to me: 'Soon what I expect

and your mind only dreams of will appear.

Soon it shall appear before your eyes.'

To a truth that bears the face of falsehood

a man should seal his lips if he is able,

for it might shame him, through no fault of his,

but here I can't be silent.  And by the strains

of this Comedy -- so may they soon succeed

in finding favor -- I swear to you, reader,

that I saw come swimming up

through that dense and murky air a shape

to cause amazement in the stoutest heart,

a shape most like one who, having plunged

to loose the anchor caught fast in a reef

or something other hidden in the sea, now rises,

reaching upward and drawing in his feet.

