So much do I feel Love's mighty power that to my grief I cannot bear it for long: for while his strength continually increases I feel that my own is failing ‑at each moment I am weaker than I was. I am not saying that Love does more than I want him to, for if he were to do what my will demands, the strength that I have from Nature, being finite, would not sustain it. In fact it is just this which grieves me, that my strength is a traitor to my desire. But if reward is born of good will, I now ask for that reward‑ so that I may draw more life from those eyes which with their beautiful radiance bring me consolation whenever I feel love.
The rays from these fair eyes enter my own loving eyes, bringing me sweetness whenever I feel bitterness. They know the way, having passed by it before, and they know the place where they left Love when, through my eyes, they brought him within me. Hence, when they turn towards me they give me my reward, but when they conceal themselves they bring loss to her whose they are, since I love her so much that I value myself only in order to serve her. My thoughts, born only of love, move to her service as to their goal: for which reason my desire for action is so intense, that if I thought I could serve her by leaving her I would willingly do so; but I know that then I should die.
Without doubt it is true love that has taken hold of me, and strongly indeed it grips me, seeing that I would do what I say on account of it: for no love is so great as that which makes death desirable in loyal service of another. And I have been fixed in this love from the moment when the great desire I feel was born by virtue of the beauty which gathers all beauty into her beautiful face. A servant I am, and when I consider whose servant, then, no matter what her disposition, I am wholly content: for one may indeed serve against one's lady's will; and if, being young, she withholds her favour from me, I wait for the time when she'll have grown wiser ‑provided that my life holds out so long.
When I consider a noble longing‑sprung from that great longing within me‑which draws all my powers to good actions, it seems to me that I have recompense beyond my deserts‑more, that I am misnamed a servant, so much does service itself become a reward from another's generosity in the presence of those fair eyes. Yet since I am holding to the truth, I must reckon this desire as service, because even though I strive to be worthy I think less of myself than of her who has me in her power‑my striving being for the greater glory of all that is hers. And hers I am entirely: so I regard myself, for Love has made me worthy of such honour.
Only Love could have made me worthily belong to one who herself does not love, but remains like a woman indifferent to the loving mind which cannot pass an hour without her. Often as I have seen her I still find in her new beauties; hence Love increases his power in me in proportion as her loveliness grows; and so it comes about that I stay in one state, and Love accustoms me to one degree of suffering and joy, just as long as that time which often torments me, that lasts from the moment I lose sight of her to when I regain it.
My beautiful song, if you resemble me you will be less proud than your goodness gives you the right to be: take care, my sweet love‑song, to choose a way and go in a manner becoming to you. Should a gentleman ask you in or stop you on your way, before entrusting yourself to him, find out if you can who his friends are‑if you want to know the sort of person he is: for the good always keep together (although it often happens that someone intrudes into company that simply gives the lie to the bad name commonly given him). Do not associate with the vicious for business or pleasure; it has never been wise to make common cause with them.
My song, before you go anywhere else, go to the three least vicious in our city. Greet two of them; but as for the third, I want you first to try to draw him away from bad company. Tell him that a good man never quarrels with the good until he has tried to overcome those who are bad. Tell him that only a fool, fearing dishonour, will refuse to abandon his folly: for to fear dishonour is to fear evil; and thus by avoiding the one, one is safe from the other.
