In the previous chapter I described how the sun revolves, and so I can now proceed to make clear the meaning of the part with which I am presently concerned. In this part, then, I begin to extol this lady by comparing her to things other than herself: I say that the sun in circling the world does not see anything so noble as her; these words indicate that she is the most noble of all the things which the sun illuminates.
The poem says: in that hour. It should be explained that the word hour is employed in two senses by astronomers. In one, day and night add up to 24 hours with day and night each consisting of 12 hours, no matter how long or short the actual duration of the day; these hours of day and night become short or long according as the length of day and night increases or diminishes. The Church uses these hours when it speaks of Prime, Terce, Sext and None; they are called temporal hours.
In the other, while day and night add up to 24 hours, the day sometimes has 15 hours and the night nine, and the night sometimes has 16 hours and the day eight, according as the length of day and night increases and diminishes; they are called equal hours. At the equinox these and the temporal hours are always identical, as must be the case when day and night are of equal length.
Then when I say: Every Intellect there on high gazes on her, I extol her without reference to anything else. I say that the heavenly Intelligences gaze on her, and that those who are noble here below think of her when they most fully experience what brings them delight. Here it should be explained that, as is stated in the Book of Causes, each Intellect above knows what is higher than itself and what is lower than itself.
So each knows God as its cause, and what is lower than itself as its effect; and since God is the absolutely universal cause of all things, in knowing Him it knows all things, with the kind of knowledge proper to an Intelligence. Consequently, all the Intelligences know the human form in its mode of existence as an ideal norm in the divine mind. It is known especially by the Intelligences that cause movement, since they are the highest particular causes of the human form and of every generated form; and they know it in all its possible perfection, as being for them the norm and exemplar.
And if when realized and individualized this human form is not perfect, that is due to a lack not in the exemplar just mentioned but in the matter which individualizes it. So when I say: Every Intellect there on high dazes on her, what I wish to convey is that she has been thus formed as the ideal exemplar of the human essence which exists in the divine mind, and, through it, in all other minds, especially in those angelic minds which by means of the heavens fashion things here below.
I develop this point when I say: And those people here who are in love. It should be explained that each being most desires its own perfection; by attaining that its every desire is stilled, and for the sake of that everything else is desired. It is this desire which always makes every delight seem defective to us, for no delight in this life is so great as to be able to take away the thirst in our souls, and make the desire just mentioned cease to remain in our thoughts.
Since this lady truly is that perfection I say that those who here below receive the greatest delight in attaining the deepest peace find that even then this lady remains in their thoughts; in saying this I declare that she is as perfect as the human essence can possibly be.
When I say: So greatly does her being please Him who bestows it, I indicate that this lady is not only the absolute perfection of human nature; she is more perfect still, in that she receives from the divine goodness beyond what is due to mankind.
For one may reasonably hold that just as every craftsman loves his best work more than any other, so God loves the best human person more than all the others; and since His generosity is not confined of necessity within any limits, His love is not measured by what is due to the recipient, but goes beyond that in the gift and favour of virtue and grace. That is why I say here that God Himself, who gives her being, out of love for her perfection bestows on her a share of His goodness beyond the limits of what is due to human nature.
When I go on, Her pure soul, I prove what is said by calling on the witness of our senses. It should be explained that, as the Philosopher says in On the Soul, the soul gives life to the body; and if it gives life to the body, it is the cause of the body; since, further, as is stated in the Book of Causes cited above, every cause bestows on its effect a share in the goodness which it has received from its own cause, the soul bestows on its body and communicates to it a share in the goodness of its own cause, who is God.
It follows that since wonderful things are seen in this lady, considered in her bodily aspect, things so wonderful that they make everyone who looks at her desirous of seeing them, it is evident that her form, that is, her soul, which governs the body as its proper cause, receives miraculously the gracious goodness of God.
So what appears in her, being beyond what is due to our nature (which is at its most perfect in her, as was said above), proves that this lady is favoured and made noble by God. This completes the account of the literal meaning of the first section of the second major part.
