Absorbed in his delight, that man of contemplation
took upon himself the teacher's role
and spoke these holy words:
'The wound that Mary closed up and anointed
was opened and inflicted
by the lovely woman now at Mary's feet.
'Below her, in the order
formed by the third tier of the seats,
as you can see, Rachel sits with Beatrice.
'Sarah and Rebecca, Judith and she --
great-grandmother of that singer who,
grieving for his sin, cried: "Miserere mei" --
'may be seen there, one beneath the other,
in their ordered ranks, while I, pausing for each name,
move petal by petal down through the rose.
'And downward from the seventh tier, or up,
parting all the petals of this flower,
are the appointed seats of Hebrew women.
'For, according to whether in their faith
they looked forward to Christ or back,
this is the wall that separates the sacred tiers.
'On this side, where the flower is in fullest bloom
with all its petals, those are seated
who believed in Christ as yet to come.
'On the other side, where the semi-circles
are interspersed with vacant spaces, are seated
those who kept their eyes on Christ already come.
'And just as here the glorious seat
of heaven's lady and the other seats beneath it
form that long dividing line,
'so, opposite, does that of the exalted soul of John,
who, holy since his birth, endured the wilderness
and martyrdom, and then two years of Hell.
'Below him, and continuing that line,
sit Francis, Benedict, Augustine, and others,
assigned as far as this, down from tier to tier.
'Now behold the depth of God's foreseeing,
for both the ways of showing faith
shall fill this garden equally.
'And know that downward from the row
that midway cuts the two dividing lines
the seats are held by those who had no merit of their own,
'but through deserving others, under fixed conditions,
were freed from sin, for all of these are spirits
released before they exercised free choice.
'This, indeed, you may discover for yourself
from their faces and their childish voices,
if you look at them with care and if you listen.
'Now you are perplexed and silent in perplexity.
Let me untie the complicated knot
in which your over-subtle thoughts have bound you.
'In all the ample range of this domain
no trace of chance can find a place --
no more than sorrow, thirst, or hunger,
'for all you see here is ordained by law eternal,
so that the circling ring here fits
the finger that was meant for it.
'Thus, the company of those who prematurely
came to this true life are not 
placed more and less exalted here among themselves.
'The King, through whom this kingdom rests
in love so great and in so great delight
their will would never dare to ask for more,
'creating every mind in His own bliss,
variously bestows His grace and as He pleases --
and, in this case, let the fact suffice.
'This is clearly and expressly noted for you
by Holy Scripture in the account of twins
who, still in their mother's womb, were moved to wrath.
'Therefore, according to the color of the hair
bestowed with so much grace, the Sovereign Light
will crown them with their fitting aureoles.
Not for what they've done or have not done
they thus are placed in separate ranks, separated
only by the keenness of the vision they were born to.
'In early times their parents' faith alone,
coupled with the innocence that they possessed,
gave sufficient proof of their salvation.
'Once the first age had run its course,
male children had to find the strength
for innocent wings in circumcision.
'But once the time of grace had come,
then, without perfect baptism in Christ,
such innocents were cast below.
'Look now on the face that most resembles Christ,
for nothing but its brightness
can make you fit to look on Christ.'
I saw such joy rain down on her,
conveyed within the minds and borne
by holy spirits framed to soar those heights,
that, however much I had seen before,
nothing had held me in such wonder and suspense,
nor shown me so close a likeness to God,
and the loving spirit that had first descended,
singing 'Ave Maria, gratia plena'
hovered before her with his wings outspread.
From every side the blessèd court all sang,
responding to the solemn sacred chant,
so that each face became more luminous with joy.
'O holy father, who on my behalf
deign to be here below, leaving the sweet place
where by eternal lot you have your seat,
'who is the angel gazing with such joy
upon the eyes of her our Queen,
so much in love he seems to be a flame?'
Thus I tried once more to gain instruction
from him who glowed in Mary's beauty
as the morning star reflects the sun.
And he: 'All confidence and grace of movement
that can be found in angel or in any blessèd soul
are found in him -- and we would have it so,
'for it is he who brought the palm to Mary
when the Son of God elected to take on
the burden of our flesh.
'But let your eyes follow my words, as I continue,
noting the eminent patricians
of this most just and pious empire.
'These two who are seated there above us,
most happy for being so near the Empress,
are, as it were, the two roots of this rose:
'He who sits beside her to her left
is that father for whose reckless tasting
mankind still tastes such bitterness.
'To her right behold that ancient father
of Holy Church to whose care Christ entrusted
the keys to this, the fairest flower.
'And he who was doomed to see before he died
the years of grief of the beautiful bride,
she who was won with the lance and the nails,
'sits next to him and, next to the other, rests
that leader under whose rule that stiff-necked people,
fickle and ungrateful, lived on manna.
'Look at Anna, where she sits across from Peter,
so content merely to gaze upon her daughter
she does not move her eyes as she sings hosanna.
'And opposite the greatest father of a family
sits Lucy, who urged on your lady when,
with lowered gaze, you headed down your path to ruin.
'But since the time runs short that readies you for sleep,
let us stop here, as a good tailor would,
who cuts the cloak as he is stocked with cloth.
'And let us fix our eyes on Primal Love,
so that, looking up toward Him, you penetrate,
as far as may be done, His brilliance.
'But, lest by any chance, beating your wings
and thinking to advance, you should fall back,
you must gain your grace through prayer,
'grace from her who has the power to help you.
You shall follow me with your devotion
so your heart does not stray from my words.'
He then began this holy supplication: