After the text has made clear the signs which appear in the noble person's conduct at each stage of life, and enable him to be recognized, signs without which he simply cannot exist any more than can the sun without light or fire without heat, it goes on to conclude its treatment of nobility by crying out to people: "See, you who have listened to me, see how numerous are those who are deceived", referring to those who, because they belong to some famous ancient family, and are descended from forefathers of true distinction, believe themselves to be noble, despite the fact that they themselves quite lack nobility.
Two objections suggest themselves here whose consideration will aptly bring this discussion to a close. Lord Manfred of Vico, who now bears the titles of Praetor and Prefect, might say: "No matter what my own character may be, I call to mind my ancestors and bring them to your attention: because of their nobility they were worthy to be given the office of Prefect, they were worthy to play a part in the imperial coronation, they were worthy to receive the rose from the Roman Pastor. Honour, then, is my due, honour and respect from everyone." This is the first objection.
The second is that the San Nazzaro family of Pavia, or the Piscitelli of Naples, might say: "If nobility is what you say it is, a divine seed graciously planted by God in the human soul, and if, as is obvious, no family-line or stock has a soul, then no line or stock may be called noble. This runs contrary to the view of those who say that ours are the most noble families of their respective cities."
Juvenal answered the first objection in the Eighth Satire, where he begins by exclaiming: "What purpose do honours paid out of respect for someone's ancestors serve, if the person who wishes to don that mantle himself lives an evil life? or if the person who is always talking about his ancestors, and parading their great and wonderful deeds, himself spends his life in low and base pursuits?" The satirical poet continues: "Is a person to be called noble because of his good birth, even though his life belies his birth? This is nothing other than calling a dwarf a giant."
Later he addresses such a person: "The only difference between you and a statue raised in memory of your ancestor is that its head is marble and yours is alive."Here I respectfully beg to differ with the poet, because a statue of marble, wood or metal that testifies to the memory of some noble person differs greatly from an evil descendant in the effect it produces.
For a statue always confirms the high opinion of the person it represents in those who have already heard of his good reputation, and creates it in the others. A wastrel son or grandson brings about quite the opposite result, for he weakens the good opinion held by those who have heard his ancestors well spoken of. They are prompted to think: "The ancestors of that person cannot be quite what they are made out to be, since we can see for ourselves the kind of plant that has grown from their seed." So anyone who constitutes a counterwitness to the reputation of good people ought to be held not in honour but in dishonour.
That is why Cicero says that "the son of a noble person must ensure that he acts as a good witness to his father's name." Therefore, in my judgment, just as anyone who discredits the name of a noble person deserves to be shunned and ignored by people, so the evil descendant of good ancestors deserves to be cast out of all human company, and a good person ought to blot from his sight such a living disgrace to the goodness that remains only in memory. This should suffice in the present context as a response to the first objection raised above.
As regards the second objection, one can reply that a family-line does not of itself possess a soul, and yet it remains true that it is called noble, and indeed is noble in a certain sense. It must be stated here that every whole is made up of its parts. One kind of whole is that in which the whole and all of its parts possess a single essence, as, for instance, in the case of man, in whom there is a single essence animating the whole and each of the parts; to say here that a property belongs to a part is to say, in exactly the same sense, that it belongs to the whole.
Another kind of whole is that in which the whole possesses an essence distinct from that of each of the parts, as, for instance, in the case of a heap of grain: here the essence of the whole is derivative, resulting from the presence of many grains, each of which possesses an essence in the true and primary sense. And with a whole of this kind the properties possessed by the parts are, like the essence, derivatively said to belong to the whole: one talks of a heap being white because the grains making up the heap are white.
This whiteness in fact exists primarily in the grains themselves; and only in consequence of that does it exist in a derivative sense in the whole heap, which can in this derivative sense be called white. It is in this latter sense that a stock or family-line can be called noble. A conclusion to be drawn from this is that just as for a heap to be white, white grains must predominate in it, so for a family-line to be noble, noble people must predominate in it, in order that the fame of its goodness may overshadow and conceal whatever it contains of the contrary.
Furthermore, just as one could remove one by one the grains of corn from a white heap and replace them one by one with grains of red melic, and thus the colour of the whole heap would finally change, so, too, with a noble family-line: the good could die one by one and evil people be born in their stead to the extent that the description would change, and it would eventually deserve to be called not noble but base. This should be an adequate reply to the second objection.
