O Simon Magus! O wretches of his kind,

greedy for gold and silver,

who prostitute the things of God

that should be brides of goodness!

Now must the trumpet sound for you,

because your place is there in that third ditch. 

Now we had come to where the next tomb lay,

having climbed to the point upon the ridge

that overlooks the middle of the trench.

O Supreme Wisdom, what great art you show

in Heaven, on earth, and in the evil world,

and what true justice does your power dispense!

Along the sides and bottom I could see

the livid stone was pierced with holes,

all round and of a single size.

They seemed to me as wide and deep

as those in my beautiful Saint John

made for the priests to baptize in,

one of which, not many years ago,

I broke to save one nearly drowned in it -- 

and let this be my seal, to undeceive all men.

From the mouth of each stuck out

a sinner's feet and legs up to the thighs

while all the rest stayed in the hole.

They all had both their soles on fire.

It made their knee-joints writhe so hard

they would have severed twisted vines or ropes.

As flames move only on the surface

of oily matter caught on fire,

so these flames flickered heel to toe.

'Who is that, master, who in his torment

wriggles more than any of his fellows

and is licked by redder flames?'

And he: 'If you like, I'll take you down

along the lower bank and you will learn,

from him, his life and his misdeeds.'

And I: 'Whatever pleases you is my desire.

You are my lord and know I do your will.

You know, too, what I leave unsaid.'

Then we came to the fourth embankment,

turned and descended on our left

into a narrow bottom pierced with holes.  

The good master clasped me to his side

and did not set me down until we came

to the pit of one lamenting with his shanks.

'Whoever you are, with your upper parts below,

planted like a post, you wretched soul,'

said I, 'come out with something, if you can.'

I stood there like a friar who confesses

a treacherous assassin.  Once done,

he calls the friar back to stay his death.

And he cried out: 'Is that you already,

are you here already, Boniface?

By several years the writing lied to me.

'Are you so swiftly sated with those profits

for which you did not fear to take by guile

the beautiful Lady and to do her outrage?'

I became like those who stand there mocked,

not comprehending what is said to them,

and thus not knowing what to say in turn.

Then Virgil said: 'Tell him right away,

"I'm not the one, I'm not the one you think."'

I gave the answer I was told to give.

At that the spirit's feet began to writhe.

Then, sighing , with a plaintive voice, he said:

'What is it then you want from me?

'If you are so keen to learn my name

that you descended from the bank for it,

know that I was cloaked in the great mantle.

'But in truth I was a son of the she-bear

and so avid was I to advance my cubs

I filled my purse as now I fill this hole.

'Beneath my head are crushed the others

who practiced simony before me,

now flattened into fissures in the rock.

'In turn I, too, shall be thrust lower down

as soon as he arrives whom I mistook you for

when I called out my hasty question.

'But the time I have already roasted my feet,

standing here upside down, is already longer

than he'll be planted with his feet on fire.

'For after him shall come a lawless shepherd

from the west, one even fouler in his deeds,

fit to be the cover over him and me.

'A new Jason shall he be, the one of whom

we read in Maccabees, and even as the king indulged

Jason, so the king of France shall deal with him.'

I do not know if then I was too bold

when I answered him in just this strain:

'Please tell me, how much treasure

'did our Lord insist on from Saint Peter

before He gave the keys into his keeping?

Surely He asked no more than "Follow me,"

'nor did Peter, or the others, take gold or silver

from Matthias when he was picked by lot

to fill the place lost by the guilty soul.

'Stay there then, for you are justly punished,

guarding well those gains, ill-gotten,

that made you boldly take your stand against King Charles.

'And were it not that I am still restrained

by the reverence I owe the keys supreme,

which once you held in the happy life above,

'I would resort to even harsher words

because your avarice afflicts the world,

trampling down the good and raising up the wicked.

'Shepherds like you the Evangelist had in mind

when he saw the one that sits upon the waters

committing fornication with the kings,

'she that was born with seven heads

and from ten horns derived her strength

so long as virtue pleased her bridegroom.

'You have wrought yourselves a god of gold and silver.

How then do you differ from those who worship idols

except they worship one and you a hundred?

'Ah, Constantine, to what evil you gave birth,

not by your conversion, but by the dowry

that the first rich Father had from you!'

And while I sang such notes to him,

whether gnawed by anger or by conscience,

he kicked out hard with both his feet.

Truly I believe this pleased my leader,

he listened with a look of such contentment

to the sound of the truthful words I spoke.

Therefore, he caught me in his arms

and, when he had me all upon his breast,

remounted by the path he had descended,

nor did he tire of holding me so close

but bore me to the summit of the arch

that crosses from the fourth dike to the fifth.

Here gently he set down his burden,

gently on account of the steep, rough ridge

that would have made hard going for a goat.

And there, before me, another valley opened.

