Now that my bread has been sufficiently prepared in the preceding book, by the introductory discussion which I offer there, conditions bid and command my ship to leave port. So, having set the sail of reason to catch the breeze of my desire, I put out to sea with hopes of a pleasant journey and of a safe and honourable arrival at the conclusion of the meal. But to ensure that greater benefit be derived from the food I offer, I wish to explain how it should be eaten, before the first course is served.
As I noted in the opening chapter, this commentary must be literal and allegorical. To indicate what this means, it should be explained that texts can be interpreted, and must therefore be elucidated, principally in four senses.
The first is called literal: this is the sense conveyed simply by the overt meaning of the words of a fictitious story, as, for example, in the case of fables told by poets. The second is called allegorical: this is the sense concealed under the cloak of these fables, and consists of a truth hidden under a beautiful lie. An example of this is Ovid's saying that Orpheus with his lyre made the wild beasts tame, and moved stones and trees to follow him; what this signifies is that the wise man, with the instrument of his voice, can tame and soften cruel hearts, and make those whose lives are devoid of knowledge and culture act according to his wishes.
(Why wise men devised this stratagem of hiding their meaning is something I shall explain in the penultimate book.) I recognize that theologians understand this allegorical sense in a different way from the poets; but since my intention here is to follow the practice of the poets, I shall understand the allegorical sense as they do.
The third sense is called moral: this is the sense that teachers must be on the alert to notice as they work through texts, for their own benefit and that of their students. One can, for instance, notice in the Gospel that when Christ went up the mountain to be transfigured he took with him the three selected from the twelve apostles; the moral lesson which can be drawn from this is that we should have few companions in matters that touch us most closely.
The fourth sense is called anagogical, that is, transcending the senses: this is brought out when a work is expounded with regard to its spiritual meaning; even though the work is true in a literal sense, what is said there speaks also of things beyond our knowledge relating to eternal glory. One can see this, for instance, in that song of the prophet which says that, when the people of Israel escaped from Egypt, Judah was made holy and free.
For although what is said here is clearly true in a literal sense, the spiritual meaning of these words is no less true, namely, that when the soul escapes from sin it is made holy and free in its distinctive power.
To establish this sense, the literal sense must always be accorded primacy, as the one in whose meaning all others are contained, and without which it would be impossible and irrational to attend to the other senses, especially the allegorical.
This would be impossible because in anything whatever that has an exterior and an interior it is impossible to come to what is interior without first coming to what is exterior; since, consequently, the exterior of any text consists of the literal meaning, it is impossible to come to the other meanings, especially the allegorical, without first coming to the literal.
Moreover, this would be impossible because in anything whatever, be it natural or artificial, it is impossible to progress to the point of having a form if the subject in which the form is to inhere is not first made ready to receive the form. For instance, it is impossible for the form of a gold object to come into being if the matter in question, that is, its subject, is not first melted down and prepared for its reception, or for the form of a box to come into being if the matter in question, that is, the wood, is not first made ready and prepared for its reception.
Since, then, the literal meaning functions as the subject or matter for all the other meanings, especially the allegorical, it is impossible to come to know these latter without first knowing the former.
Furthermore, this would be impossible because in anything whatever, natural or artificial, it is impossible to make progress without first laying the foundation, as, for instance, in the case of a house or of knowledge. Since, then, knowledge is built up by a series of demonstrations, and demonstrating the literal meaning is the foundation for doing the same with regard to the others, especially the allegorical, it is impossible to come to the other meanings without first coming to the literal one.
Furthermore, supposing that this were possible, it would be irrational, that is, contrary to the inherent order of things, and so progress would be made only with great difficulty and with many mistakes. Consequently, as the Philosopher says in the Physics, nature wishes us to proceed in an ordered way in our knowing, that is, by advancing from what we know well to what we know less well. (I use the phrase ‘nature wishes’ advisedly, since this way of gaining knowledge is natural to us from birth.)
And so if the senses other than the literal are less readily determined – as is patently the case – it would be irrational to proceed by demonstrating what these are before first demonstrating what the literal sense is.
For these reasons, then, when treating each canzone I shall always discuss first the literal meaning, and thereafter the allegory contained in it, that is, its hidden truth; on occasion I shall touch on the other senses parenthetically, as time and place dictate.
