A clear understanding of the literal meaning (which is our present concern), and specifically of the literal meaning of the first part in the above division, will be gained if it is explained who those beings are who are called to listen to me, how many of them there are, and which is the third heaven, which I say they move; I shall speak first of the heaven, then of those whom I address.
Although we can know very little about such things compared with what there is to be known, what the human mind does manage to perceive about them brings greater delight than does the extensive and certain knowledge we possess about things which impinge on the senses, as the Philosopher indicates in his work On Animals.
I declare, then, that many different opinions have been held regarding the number and location of the various heavens, although in the end the truth was discovered. When he was relying solely on a long-standing misperception of the astronomers, Aristotle believed that there were only eight heavens, of which the outermost, encompassing the whole, was the heaven of the fixed stars, that is, the eighth sphere; beyond this no other heaven existed.
He also believed that the heaven of the sun adjoined that of the moon, and was, therefore, the heaven second from us. This quite erroneous opinion of his is there for anyone to see in the second book of On the Heavens and the Earth, that is, of the second of the works on physics. However, in the twelfth book of the Metaphysics he excuses himself for having advanced this opinion, where he makes it clear that he had simply followed the views of others when he was required to treat of astronomy.
Ptolemy subsequently recognized that the eighth heaven was subject to more than one movement, for he noted that the circle it traced deviated from the perfect circle that turns the whole from east to west. And, acknowledging the force of philosophical principles, which strictly require that there be a first moving body which is quite free of multiplicity, he posited the existence of another heaven beyond the Heaven of the Stars, which would make this revolution from east to west.
So in his view, in conformity with what is held in astronomy and in philosophy after these movements had been perceived, there are nine moving heavens. The location of these is clear and exactly known, on the basis of what is perceived by the senses and by reason in a discipline called Perspective and in Arithmetic and Geometry, and of what is perceived in other sense experiences, such as the following: it is apparent to the senses in an eclipse of the Sun that the Moon lies beneath the Sun; or again we have the eye-witness report of Aristotle that the new Moon on its dark side passed in front of Mars which remained hidden until it reappeared on the other side of the Moon, its bright side, which was facing west.
The heavens come in the following order. The first in the sequence is the Heaven of the Moon; the second, Mercury; the third, Venus; the fourth, the Sun; the fifth, Mars; the sixth, Jupiter; the seventh, Saturn; and the eighth is the Heaven of the Stars. The ninth is not perceptible to the senses, except in the movement spoken of above; many call this the Crystalline Heaven, that is, the heaven that is diaphanous or completely transparent.
However, Catholics hold that beyond all these there lies the Empyrean Heaven, meaning the heaven of flame or of light. They hold that this is motionless because it possesses in its every part the perfection required by its matter.
It is this quality that causes the First Moving Heaven to move with the utmost speed, for since in every part of that ninth heaven bordering the Empyrean there burns an ardent longing to be united to every part of that most divine heaven which is at rest, it revolves inside that heaven with a desire so intense that its speed is almost beyond comprehension.
Restfulness and peace are the marks of this dwelling-place of that most high Godhead who alone fully sees Himself. According to the teaching of Holy Church, which cannot lie, this is the dwelling-place of blessed spirits; and it will be clear to anyone who properly grasps his meaning that Aristotle implies the same view in the first part of On the Heavens and the Earth.
This is the heaven that crowns the universe: in it the whole universe is contained, and outside of it nothing exists; it does not itself exist within any place, but rather was formed only within the primal Mind, or Protonoe as the Greeks call it. This is the splendour to which the Psalmist referred where he says to God: "Your splendour rises up above the heavens".
And so to sum up the discussion so far: it is clear that there are ten heavens, of which that of Venus is the third; this is the heaven mentioned in the part whose meaning I am presently concerned to make clear.
It should be explained that each heaven below the Crystalline Heaven has two poles that are stationary with respect to itself; the ninth heaven has poles that are stationary, fixed and immutable in every respect. Each heaven, the ninth no less than the others, has a circle which can be called the equator of its own particular heaven; this at every point in the heaven's revolution remains equidistant from each of the poles, as anyone can confirm through the use of his senses by spinning an apple or some other round object. In each heaven this circle moves with greater speed than all of the other parts, as anyone who gives the matter some thought can grasp.
And the closer each part is to this circle the faster it moves; the farther away and the closer to the pole it is, the slower it moves, since its revolution covers a shorter distance but must necessarily take the same time as those covering a larger distance.
Furthermore, the closer any part of the heaven is to the equatorial circle, the more it surpasses the heaven's poles in nobility, for it has more movement, more perfection, more life, more form, and it has greater contact with the heaven above it, and is, therefore, more powerful. It follows that the stars in the Heaven of the Stars are of greater power compared to each other the closer they are to this circle.
Located on this circle in the heaven of Venus (our present subject) is a small sphere which itself spins within that heaven; astronomers give the name epicycle to the circle of that sphere. And just as the large sphere spins around two poles, so does this small one; similarly, this small sphere has its own equatorial circle, and in it, too, the closer any part is to that circle the nobler it is; on the arc or back of this circle is located the brilliant star Venus.
Although it has been said earlier, taking the word "heaven" in its strictest sense, that there are ten heavens, this number does not cover all the heavens, for what has just been mentioned, the epicycle on which the star is located, is itself a heaven or sphere. It does not have the same essence as the heaven that carries it, though it is closer in nature to that heaven than to any other. The two together are spoken of as one heaven, and both take their name from the star.
A discussion of the other heavens and the other stars lies outside the scope of the present treatise; the description given of the third heaven should suffice: that heaven is my present subject, and it has been discussed as fully as present purposes require.
