'Virgin Mother, daughter of your Son,
more humble and exalted than any other creature,
fixed goal of the eternal plan,
'you are the one who so ennobled human nature
that He, who made it first, did not disdain
to make Himself of its own making.
'Your womb relit the flame of love --
its heat has made this blossom seed
and flower in eternal peace.
'To us you are a noonday torch of charity,
while down below, among those still in flesh,
you are the living fountainhead of hope.
'Lady, you are so great and so prevail above,
should he who longs for grace not turn to you,
his longing would be doomed to wingless flight.
'Your loving kindness does not only aid
whoever seeks it, but many times
gives freely what has yet to be implored.
'In you clemency, in you compassion,
in you munificence, in you are joined
all virtues found in any creature.
'This man who, from within the deepest pit
the universe contains up to these heights
has seen the disembodied spirits, one by one,
'now begs you, by your grace, to grant such power
that, by lifting up his eyes,
he may rise higher toward his ultimate salvation.
'And I, who never burned for my own seeing
more than now I burn for his, offer all my prayers,
and pray that they may not fall short,
'so that your prayers disperse on his behalf
all clouds of his mortality and let
the highest beauty be displayed to him.
'This too, my Queen, I ask of you, who can achieve
whatever you desire, that you help him preserve,
after such vision, the purity of his affections.
'Let your protection rule his mortal passions.
See Beatrice, with so many of the blessed,
palms pressed together, joining me in prayer.'
Those eyes belovèd and revered by God,
fixed on him who prayed, made clear to us
how dear to her all true devotion is.
Then she turned her gaze to the eternal Light.
It is incorrect to think that any living being
can penetrate that brightness with such unblinking eyes.
And, as I neared the end of all desire,
I extended to its limit, as was right,
the ardor of the longing in my soul.
With his smile, Bernard signaled
that I look upward, but of my own accord
I was already doing what he wished,
for my sight, becoming pure,
rose higher and higher through the ray
of the exalted light that in itself is true.
From that time on my power of sight exceeded
that of speech, which fails at such a vision,
as memory fails at such abundance.
Just as the dreamer, after he awakens,
still stirred by feelings that the dream evoked,
cannot bring the rest of it to mind,
such am I, my vision almost faded from my mind,
while in my heart there still endures
the sweetness that was born of it.
Thus the sun unseals an imprint in the snow.
Thus the Sibyl's oracles, on weightless leaves,
lifted by the wind, were swept away.
O Light exalted beyond mortal thought,
grant that in memory I see again
but one small part of how you then appeared
and grant my tongue sufficient power
that it may leave behind a single spark
of glory for the people yet to come,
since, if you return but briefly to my mind
and then resound but softly in these lines,
the better will your victory be conceived.
I believe, from the keenness of the living ray 
that I endured, I would have been undone
had I withdrawn my eyes from it.
And I remember that, on this account,
I grew more bold and thus sustained my gaze
until I reached the Goodness that is infinite.
O plenitude of grace, by which I could presume
to fix my eyes upon eternal Light
until my sight was spent on it!
In its depth I saw contained,
by love into a single volume bound,
the pages scattered through the universe:
substances, accidents, and the interplay between them,
as though they were conflated in such ways
that what I tell is but a simple light.
I believe I understood the universal form
of this dense knot because I feel my joy expand,
rejoicing as I speak of it.
My memory of that moment is more lost
than five and twenty centuries make dim that enterprise
when, in wonder, Neptune at the Argo's shadow stared.
Thus all my mind, absorbed,
was gazing, fixed, unmoving and intent,
becoming more enraptured in its gazing.
He who beholds that Light is so enthralled
that he would never willingly consent
to turn away from it for any other sight,
because the good that is the object of the will
is held and gathered in perfection there
that elsewhere would imperfect show.  
Now my words will come far short
of what I still remember, like a babe's
who at his mother's breast still wets his tongue.
Not that the living Light at which I gazed
took on other than a single aspect --
for It is always what It was before --
but that my sight was gaining strength, even as I gazed
at that sole semblance and, as I changed,
it too was being, in my eyes, transformed.
In the deep, transparent essence of the lofty Light
there appeared to me three circles
having three colors but the same extent,
and each one seemed reflected by the other
as rainbow is by rainbow, while the third one seemed fire,
equally breathed forth by one and by the other.
O how scant is speech, too weak to frame my thoughts.
Compared to what I still recall my words are faint -- 
to call them little is to praise them much.
O eternal Light, abiding in yourself alone,
knowing yourself alone, and, known to yourself
and knowing, loving and smiling on yourself!
That circling which, thus conceived,
appeared in you as light's reflection,
once my eyes had gazed on it a while, seemed, 
within itself and in its very color,
to be painted with our likeness,
so that my sight was all absorbed in it.
Like the geometer who fully applies himself	
to square the circle and, for all his thought,
cannot discover the principle he lacks,
such was I at that strange new sight.
I tried to see how the image fit the circle
and how it found its where in it.
But my wings had not sufficed for that
had not my mind been struck by a bolt
of lightning that granted what I asked.
Here my exalted vision lost its power.
But now my will and my desire, like wheels revolving
with an even motion, were turning with
the Love that moves the sun and all the other stars.