Of all the products of the divine wisdom man is the most wonderful, when one considers how in him the divine power combined three natures in one form, and how his body must be subtly harmonized, since it is organized to serve that form in almost all its powers.
Consequently, in view of the complex correlation that must exist among so many organs if they are to be well integrated, there are few perfect men among such a vast number. And if this creature is so wonderful, it is certainly a daunting task to treat of its various aspects not only in words but even in thought. A similar sentiment is expressed by the Sage where he says: "Who will search the wisdom of God which existed before all things?" and elsewhere: "You shall not enquire about things too high for you, nor search after things beyond your reach; consider, rather, what God has commanded you, and do not be curious about His other works", that is, do not concern yourself with them.
I, then, who intend in this third section to say something about a certain aspect of such a creature, regarding how in her body a visible beauty appears reflecting the goodness of her soul, begin fearfully, not confidently, intending to unravel such a complicated knot, and if not wholly at least in part.
I declare, then, that now that I have made clear the meaning of that section in which this woman is extolled as regards her soul, it is time to go on to consider how I extol her as regards her body, where I say: Things appear in her countenance.
I say that in her countenance things appear which reveal some of the pleasures of Paradise; and of these the most noble, and the one which is the fruit and end of all the others, is to experience contentment; this is the same as being happy. This pleasure truly is found, though in a different way, in her countenance, for in gazing on her people experience contentment, so sweetly does her beauty feed the eyes of those who gaze on her, but in a way that differs from the contentment found in Paradise: that is everlasting, which this cannot be for anyone.
Since someone might raise the question of where this wonderful pleasure appears in her, I specify two parts of her person where human pleasure and displeasure most appear. It should be explained that in whatever part the soul is most fully active in carrying out its role it is that part which it most intently strives to adorn, and there that it most subtly acts.
Consequently, we see that in the human face, which is where the soul exercises its role more fully than in any other external part, it strives so subtly that, through acting there as subtly as it can in the matter it informs, no two faces are alike; this happens because there the final potency of matter, which is somewhat different in every individual, is drawn into action.
And since in the face the soul is most fully active in two places because all three natures of the soul have a certain function to perform in those two places – that is, in the eyes and in the mouth – it especially adorns those, and there strives with all its power to create something beautiful, if possible. I say that it is in these two places that these pleasures appear, at the words: in her eyes and in her sweet smile.
These two places may be called, in a lovely simile, balconies of the lady who inhabits the edifice of the body – I refer to the soul – for there, although under a veil as it were, she often reveals herself. She reveals herself so clearly in the eyes that the attentive observer may know the emotion she is presently experiencing.
Since, then, there are six emotions proper to the human soul, namely, graciousness, zeal, pity, envy, love and shame, the soul cannot be moved by one of these without some sign of this appearing at the window of the eyes, unless that emotion is kept hidden within by a powerful effort. That is why some have in the past torn out their eyes to prevent the shame they feel within from being apparent to the outside world, as the poet Statius indicates with regard to Oedipus the Theban when he says of him: "He engulfed his damnable shame in eternal night."
The soul reveals itself in the mouth, rather like colour behind glass. And what is laughter if not a coruscation of the soul's delight, that is, a light appearing externally which corresponds to the state of being within? And so to show that one's soul is moderate in its cheerfulness, one must laugh moderately, with proper sobriety and with slight movement of the lips, so that the lady who then reveals herself, as has been said, may seem modest, and not dissolute.
That is why the Book of the Four Cardinal Virtues commends us to act in this way: "Your laughter should not be raucous", that is, should not be like the cackling of a hen. Ah wonderful laughter of my lady, of whom I speak: it never made itself known except through her eyes.
I say that Love in her draws these things there, as to his domain; in this two kinds of love may be recognized. First, the soul's love, which belongs specifically to these places; second, universal love, which disposes all things to love and to be loved, and directs the soul to adorn these parts.
When I continue: They overwhelm our intellect, I exonerate myself with regard to the fact that what I say about such outstanding beauty is little by comparison with what it merits; I explain that there are two reasons why I say little about it. The first is that these things which appear in her countenance overpower our intellect, that is, the human intellect; and I describe how the overwhelming occurs, comparing it to the way in which the sun overwhelms weak sight but not sight that is healthy and strong. The other reason is that one cannot look on these things for any length of time, for in looking at them the soul becomes intoxicated, so that immediately after it starts to look its every function goes awry.
When I go on: Her beauty rains down flames of fire, I have recourse to giving a description of the effect it has, since it is impossible fully to describe that beauty itself. It should be explained here that the most appropriate way to describe all those things which defeat our intellect in that it cannot grasp what they are, is to describe them by considering the effects they produce; adopting this approach, we can come to some knowledge of God, of the separate substances and of prime matter.
Consequently, I say that the beauty of that lady rains down flames of fire, that is, a fervour of love and charity; alive with a noble spirit, that is, a fervour inspired with a noble spirit, that is, right desire, by means of which and out of which is born the beginning of every good thought. And her beauty not only does this, but undoes and destroys what is contrary to this, namely, the innate vices, which are the greatest enemy of good thoughts.
Here it should be explained that there are certain vices in man to which he is naturally inclined – some men, for instance, are inclined to anger through having a choleric disposition; vices of this kind are innate, that is, connatural. Other vices are habitual, blame for which lies not with a person's disposition but with his habits – for instance, intemperance, especially as regards wine; these vices are avoided and overcome by good habits, through which a person becomes virtuous, finding no strain in exercising moderation, as the Philosopher says in the Ethics.
Indeed the difference between connatural and habitual passions is this: habitual passions disappear completely through the exercise of good habits, since their source, bad habits, is done away with by its contrary; connatural vices, on the other hand, whose source is the nature of the person marked by the passions, while greatly weakened by good habits, do not disappear completely as regards the first stirring, though they certainly do disappear completely as regards continuance; this is due to the fact that good habits are not a perfect match for nature, in which these vices have their source.
Consequently, a man who, having been born with a bad nature, directs and controls himself contrary to the impulse of nature is more praiseworthy than one who, having been born with a good nature, adheres to it by good conduct or returns to the right path after going astray, just as it is more praiseworthy to control a difficult horse than one which is free of faults.
In saying, then, as I have just done, that these flames which rain down from her beauty break vices which are innate, that is, connatural, I am indicating that her beauty has the power to renew nature in those who gaze on her – which is something miraculous. This confirms what was said above in another chapter, where I declare that she helps our faith.
Lastly, when I say, So let any woman who hears her beauty, under the guise of an admonition I draw a conclusion regarding the end for which such beauty was created: I say that any woman who feels her beauty criticized for some lack should look on this most perfect exemplar. By this I mean that she was created not only to improve the good, but even to make something good out of what is bad.
I add: He thought of her who set the universe in motion, signifying that it is by the divine will that nature produced such an effect. This marks the end of the entire second major part of this canzone.
