Love, speaking fervently in my mind of my lady, often utters such things concerning her that my intellect is bewildered by them. His speech sounds so sweetly that the soul, as she attends and hears, says: ‘Alas that I am unable to express what I hear of my lady!’ And certainly, if I wish to treat of what I hear of her, I must first leave aside what my intellect does not grasp; and then, too, much of what it does understand, for I should not be able to express it. If then these words of mine which undertake her praise be found wanting, let the blame fall on the weak intellect, and on our faculty of speech which lacks the power to record all that Love says.

The sun that circles the whole world never sees anything so noble as when its light falls there where dwells the lady of whom Love makes me speak. All Intelligences on high gaze at her, and those who here below are in love still find her in their thoughts, when Love brings them to partake of his peace. So much does her being please Him who gives it her that He continually pours His power into her beyond the requirement of our nature. Her pure soul makes it clear through what she governs that she receives this perfection from Him; for among her beauties such things are seen that the eyes of those on whom her light falls send to the heart messengers full of longing, which gather air and turn into sighs.

The divine goodness descends into her in the same way as into an angel that sees Him; and let any noble lady who does not believe this keep her company and contem­plate her bearing. Whenever she speaks a spirit comes down from heaven to testify that the high perfection she possesses transcends our measure. The gracious actions that she displays vie with each other in calling on Love with such a voice as must awaken him. Of her it can be said: nobility in woman is what is found in her, and beauty is all that resembles her. Further, it can be said that her aspect helps to induce belief in what seems miraculous; and so our faith is strengthened: and it was for this that she was established from eternity.

