After refuting the error of others in so far as they make nobility depend on riches, I go on to refute it in so far as they claim that time is a cause of nobility, as implied in the phrase age-old wealth. This refutation is effected in the section beginning Advocates of that view maintain that a base man cannot himself f become noble.
It proceeds first by means of an argument advanced by those in error on this point, then, putting them to even greater shame, by destroying this very argument in the section beginning Furthermore, it follows from the foregoing. The text concludes by stating that since their error has now been exposed, it is time to concentrate on what is truly the case; this latter section begins It is clear, then, to healthy minds.
The first section to be discussed begins Advocates of that view maintain that a base man cannot himself become noble. The opinion of these people who are in error is that no one who is base at any time in his life may ever be called noble; similarly, neither may anyone who is the offspring of a father who was base. This is fatal to their own belief, which signifies in the use of the word "age-old" that time is essential to the concept of nobility. For according to the view of nobility they take, it is impossible for the passage of time to bring nobility into being, and this precludes the possibility of a base man's ever becoming noble, whatever he does or whatever happens to him; it precludes, too, the possibility of a transition from a base father to a noble son,
for the son of a base man remains base, as does his son in turn, and so on for ever, so that there never will be a point at which nobility can begin through passage of time.
If my adversary were to attempt to defend himself by saying that nobility will begin at the point where the base status of a person's ancestors becomes forgotten, my reply is that they contradict themselves in saying this, because at that point there will necessarily be a transition from baseness to nobility, occurring between one period and another in a person's life or between father and son, which is something excluded by the view they hold.
If my adversary were obstinately to defend himself by saying that those who share his view do indeed maintain that this transition can take place, when the base status of someone's ancestors disappears from memory, although the text makes no mention of this, it is only right that the commentary should make some reply to this. My reply, then, is this: four enormous absurdities would follow from what they say, indicating that their argument simply cannot be sound.
The first absurdity is that the better people were, the more difficult it would be for nobility to be brought into being and the more slowly this would happen, which is the height of absurdity, for, as I have noted, the better a thing is, the more fully is it a cause of goodness – and nobility is one of the things everyone recognizes to be good.
Let me substantiate this point. If disappearance from memory were what brought nobility into being, then nobility would be brought into being more quickly the more forgetful people were, for the more forgetful people were, the more quickly would complete disappearance from memory occur. It follows that the more forgetful people were, the sooner would they be noble; and, contrariwise, the better memory people had, the more slowly would they become noble.
The second absurdity is that the distinction between noble and base could be applied to nothing apart from human beings. This is quite absurd, because in every species of being we see nobility and baseness exemplified, as indicated by our speaking of a noble or base horse, a noble or base falcon, a noble or base pearl.
The opinion under discussion does not, however, permit of such a distinction, as I shall now show. Granted that the cause of nobility is the disappearance from memory of base ancestors, and that whenever there is no question of baseness of ancestry such baseness cannot disappear from memory (since disappearance of memory occurs through the memory of something that has existed gradually being lost); and, furthermore, that in these other classes of being – animals, plants and minerals – there is no reason for attributing either baseness or nobility to any of them, since all receive from nature alone the same endowment and equal status, then nobility cannot come into being in their case. Neither can baseness, since nobility and baseness are related to each other as the possession or privation of a quality in one subject who is capable of either. It follows that the distinction between these two could not exist in these cases.
My adversary might maintain that in other things nobility is constituted by the excellence of the thing, but that in men it is constituted by the lack of any memory of a man's base condition. To an opinion so grossly stupid as one that maintains that nobility in other beings signifies excellence, and yet in men signifies forgetfulness of a man's base condition, the reply should be given not verbally but with a knife!
The third absurdity is that the offspring would often precede the progenitor, a patent impossibility. That such is implied can be shown as follows. Let us suppose that Gerard of Cammino was the grandson of the basest peasant who ever drank the waters of the Sile or the Cagnano, and that the memory of his grandfather had not yet disappeared. Who would dare to say that Gerard of Cammino was a base person? Who would disagree with me when I say that he was noble? Certainly no one, no matter how puffed up by self-importance, since Gerard was indeed noble, and will always be remembered as such.
If, however, the memory of his ancestor of base condition had not yet disappeared (as our hypothesis supposes), and if, furthermore, Gerard were indeed a person of great nobility and his nobility were as clearly evident as in fact it is, then nobility would exist in him before its progenitor existed. This is absolutely impossible.
The fourth absurdity is that the same person would be deemed noble after his death who was not noble during his life, the greatest possible absurdity. That such is implied can be shown as follows. Let us suppose that while Dardanus was alive the memory of his base ancestors survived, and that while Laomedon was alive the memory of his ancestors had quite disappeared from memory. According to the opinion held by my adversary, Laomedon was noble during his life, and Dardanus was base during his. Since no memory of their ancestors (specifically those preceding Dardanus) has survived to our time, we must say that Dardanus was base during his life and noble after his death.
(It is no objection to this to say that Dardanus was the son of Jupiter, for that is a fable, which carries no weight in a philosophical debate.) I have shown, therefore, that the argument in which disappearance from memory is held to be the cause of nobility is false and misleading.
