To convey a fuller understanding of what is meant by human excellence in so far as it is the source of all that is good in us – in short, by what is called nobility – I shall devote a special chapter to clarifying how this excellence descends into us. I shall do so by speaking of this first from the perspective of philosophical knowledge, then from the perspective of theological (or divine and spiritual) knowledge.
By way of introduction it should be noted that, while man is composed of both soul and body, this excellence pertains not to the body but to the soul, in which it exists in the form of a seed sown by the divine power, as stated above.Divergent accounts have in fact been given by various philosophers as to why our souls differ from each other. Avicenna and Algazel held that a soul was noble or base according as its intrinsic nature and its source were noble or base. Plato and others held that souls originate from the stars, and that the degree of nobility of each depends on that of its star.
Pythagoras held that all souls were of identical nobility, not only human souls, but even the souls of brute animals and plants, and indeed the forms of minerals; his view was that no difference exists except that between bodies and forms. Now if each of these philosophers were given the opportunity to defend his own opinion, one might discover that the truth is present in them all. However, since at first sight they seem to have strayed somewhat from the truth, it is better not to take their opinions as our guide but that of Aristotle and the Peripatetics.
I declare, therefore, that when the human seed falls into its receptacle, the womb, it brings with it a threefold power: that of the generating soul, that of the heavens, and that of the elements of which the seed is comprised, that is, of its own constitution. It matures and disposes the matter to receive the formative power, which is given by the soul of the male parent. The formative power prepares the organs to receive the power of the heavens, which brings the soul into life from the potency latent in the seed.
As soon as this is brought into being, it receives the potential intellect from the power of the Mover of the Heavens. In coming to the soul, this intellect bears within itself in a potential way all the universal forms, reflecting their presence in the One who brings it into being, though in a proportionately weaker degree the further removed this intellect is from the Primal Intelligence.
No one should wonder if what I am saying here seems hard to understand, for I myself find it something to marvel at that how the soul is brought into being can actually be inferred and perceived by the intellect. This is not something that can be clearly put into language, that language which is aptly termed "of the common people". I am moved to echo the Apostle: "What depths of riches there are in the wisdom and knowledge of God! How unfathomable are your judgments, how inscrutable your ways!"
Since the constitution of the seed can be better or less good, and the disposition of the man who generates the seed can be better or less good, and the disposition of the heavens to bring this effect into being can be good, better or best (depending on the constellations, which are in a constant state of change), it comes about that the soul which is brought into being from this seed and from these powers is of greater or less purity. Correspondingly, it is in proportion to the soul's purity that the power called the potential intellect spoken of above descends into the soul, in the manner stated above.
And if it happens that the intellectual power is clearly separated and freed of all bodily shadow, because of the purity of the soul that receives it, the divine excellence intensifies its presence in that power because the power is capable of receiving it, and so the divine infusion intensifies its presence in the soul gifted with this intelligence to the extent that this soul is able to receive it. This is that seed of happiness which we are presently discussing.
This account harmonizes with the view expressed by Cicero in his book On Old Age, where he has Cato say: "And so the celestial soul descended into us, coming from the most exalted dwelling to a place which is contrary to the divine nature and to eternity." In a soul such as this there is the soul's own power, the intellectual power and the divine power, that is, the infused power just described. This is why we find the Book of Causes saying: "Every noble soul has three activities: the animating, the intellectual and the divine."
There are some who go so far as to hold that if all the powers described above were to be concomitantly in their best disposition when they bring a soul into being, the infusion of divinity into that soul would be so abundant that it would almost be another God incarnate. Some account such as this is all that can be given from the perspective of philosophical knowledge.
From the perspective of theological knowledge, one can say that when the supreme deity, God, sees His creature made ready to be the recipient of His gracious goodness, He bestows this with all the abundance that the creature has been made capable of receiving. Since these gifts come from ineffable love, and love in God is associated with the Holy Spirit, they are called the gifts of the Holy Spirit.
As the prophet Isaiah distinguishes them, these are seven in number: Wisdom, Understanding, Counsel, Fortitude, Knowledge, Piety and Fear of God. What excellent crops, what an excellent and wonderful seed! What a wonderful and gracious Sower, You who wait only for human nature to make the earth ready for sowing! And how blessed are those who cultivate this seed as they ought!
It should be explained here that the first and most noble shoot that sprouts from this seed as it seeks to become fruitful is the desire of the mind, called "hormen" in Greek. If this is not well cultivated and kept growing straight by habitual good conduct, the seed itself is of little consequence; indeed, it would have been better had it never been sown.
This is why Augustine maintains, as does Aristotle, that a man must train himself to do good and to bridle his feelings, in order that this shoot we have been speaking of may become firm through habitual good conduct, and strengthen itself in its own upright growth, so that it may be able to bring forth fruit, and from its fruit may come the sweetness of human happiness.
