"The king will rejoice in God, and all who commit their lives to Him will be praised, for the voice of those who speak evil has been silenced." I am fully justified in quoting these words here, since every true king must above all else love the truth. That is why it is written in the Book of Wisdom: "Love the light of wisdom, you who lead the peoples", for it is truth itself that is the light of wisdom. I declare, then, that every king will be glad that the utterly false and harmful opinion of evil and misguided men who have until now spoken perversely on nobility has been refuted.
It is now appropriate to go on to deal with the true opinion on this matter, in accordance with the method of procedure put forward in the third chapter of the present treatise. This second part, then, begins: I affirm that every virtue stems ultimately. This part is designed to demonstrate what nobility truly is. It has two sections: the aim in the first section is to show what constitutes nobility; in the second it is to show how one can recognise the person in whom it is found.
The second section begins: The soul which this goodness adorns. The first section itself has two subsections: the first seeks to establish certain points which are essential preliminaries to perceiving the definition of nobility; the second seeks to determine what this definition is. The second subsection begins: Wherever virtue is present, so, too, is nobility.
To put us in the best position to understand what the treatise is saying, we must first clarify two points: what is meant by the word nobility as a purely general term; and what method should be used to establish the definition just spoken of. I contend, then, on the basis of how the word nobility is used in common parlance, that it signifies in any being the perfection of its own particular nature.
It is used in this sense not only of mankind, but of all classes of things, for people call noble anything whatever – be it a stone, a plant, a horse or a falcon – that is perfect in the particular nature it possesses. This meaning is reflected in Solomon's words in Ecclesiastes: "Blessed is the country whose king is noble", which is the same as saying, whose king is perfect, possessing perfection of soul and body. The same sense is clearly present in the preceding verse: "Woe to you, o country, whose king is a child", that is, lacking the perfection of adulthood. (I may say that a man may be a child not only by reason of age, but also by reason of immoral conduct and of a shallow way of life, as the Philosopher makes plain in the Ethics.)
Some people, certainly, are so foolish as to think that what is meant by the word "noble" is "to be widely talked about and known"; they claim that the word comes from a variant of conoscere, to know, namely, nosco, I know. This is quite false, for were this the case it would follow that in any class of being the more widely something was talked about and known the more noble it would be. So the obelisk of St Peter would be the noblest stone in the world; Asdente, the cobbler of Parma, would be more noble than any of his fellow citizens; and Albuino de la Scala would be more noble than Guido da Castello di Reggio; but in fact each of these propositions is utterly false. It is, then, also quite false that "noble" comes from conoscere. Its true etymology is non vile, meaning "not base"; consequently, "noble" is equivalent to "not base".
The philosopher speaks of the perfection under discussion when he says in the Physics: "Every being is perfect in the highest degree when it reaches and attains flawless possession of the quality proper to it; when that occurs, it exists as realizing its own nature to the highest degree. So a circle may be called perfect when it truly is a circle", that is, when it attains flawless possession of the quality proper to it. When this occurs, it exists as realizing its own proper nature in its entirety, and may be called a noble circle.
This is the case when there is a point within the circle that is precisely equidistant from the circumference, such being the quality proper to a circle. So a circle that has the shape of an egg is not noble; nor is a circle noble that has the shape of an almost full moon, since in it the nature of a circle is not perfectly realized. It should, then, be clear that whenever we attribute nobility to anything we attribute to it the perfect realization of its particular nature. This, therefore, is the first point that had to be examined to put us in a better position to understand the part of the treatise with which we are now concerned.
The second topic needing clarification is how we ought to proceed in order to arrive at the definition of human nobility, which is the aim of the present discussion. Since the highest perfection of beings which belong to one species (as do all men) cannot be defined simply by reference to the fundamental capacities common to the species, it has to be both defined and recognized through the effects produced by those capacities.
That is why Christ (as the Gospel of St Matthew records) follows his exhortation "Beware of false prophets" with the words: "By their fruits you shall know them." We ought to determine what this definition is by following the most direct path, and this will be done by studying these fruits. These are, in fact, the moral and intellectual virtues, of which our nobility is the seed, as will clearly be stated in the definition. These are the two points that have to be understood before further progress can be made, as was said earlier in this chapter.
