Now that the literal meaning has been made sufficiently clear, it is time to go on to the allegorical and true exposition. So, starting again at the beginning, I declare that when I lost the first delight of my soul, of whom I made mention above, I was pierced with a sadness so keen that nothing could offer me solace.
However, after some time my mind, which was striving to recover its health, having recognized that my own resources and those of others were incapable of bringing me consolation, proposed that I adopt the means once used by someone in the past to console himself when he was desolate; and so I read that little‑known work of Boethius in which he describes how he had found consolation when he was imprisoned and friendless.
When I heard further that Cicero also had written a book in which, in the course of discussing his theme, On Friendship, he had spoken a few words on the consolation found by Laelius, a man of outstanding character, on the death of his friend Scipio, I set myself to read that work, too.
Although at first it was hard for me to penetrate their meaning, I eventually did so to the greatest extent allowed by such skill in Latin as I possessed, and a certain application of my native intelligence, thanks to which I had already become aware of many things in a dream-like way, as may be seen in The New Life.
And just as it often happens that someone goes in search of silver and quite unintentionally finds gold, which a hidden cause puts in his way, perhaps not without God's willing it, so in my search for consolation I found not only a remedy for my tears, but a linguistic key to authors, disciplines and books. Reflecting on these, I became firmly convinced that philosophy, who was the lady of these authors, these disciplines and these books, was something of supreme importance.
I imagined it as having the form of a noble lady, and I could not imagine her with a bearing other than full of pity; consequently, my power to perceive truth found such delight in gazing on her that I could scarcely turn it elsewhere.
Drawn by this image, I began to go to where she truly revealed herself, that is, to the schools of the religious and the disputations of the philosophers. And so in a short time, perhaps some thirty months, I began to experience so profoundly the sweetness she brings that love of her drove out and destroyed all thought of anything else.
Finding myself, therefore, being drawn from the thought of my first love by the power of this other, I gave voice to the wonder I felt in the words of the above canzone, in which I describe my real situation under another guise. I adopted this strategy because there was no form of vernacular poetry of sufficient merit to portray directly the lady with whom I was in love, nor were those who heard the poem of sufficient culture to have understood the nonfictitious words so readily; nor, further, would they have given credence to the true meaning, as they did to the fictitious, since they certainly believed that its author was quite capable of the first love, but not of the second. I began, therefore, with the words: You who move the third heaven by understanding.
Since, as has been said, this lady was daughter of God, queen of all creation, most noble and beautiful Philosophy, it must be made clear who were these movers, and what was the third heaven. I shall discuss the heaven first, to conform with the order followed above.
There is no need here to proceed by giving the poem's divisions and a word-for-word commentary, for now that the fictitious story has been transformed from what it sounds as if it is saying into what it really signifies, the true meaning will be easy enough to grasp in the light of the previous exposition.
