Now that I have described how and why love is born, and described the conflict that assailed me, I must go on to clarify the meaning of the part of the poem in which conflicting thoughts do battle within me.
I declare that I must first speak of the part played by the soul, that is, by the old thought, and then that played by the other thought, for this reason: what a speaker is most intent on conveying must always be reserved for the end, for what is said last makes the most enduring impression on the mind of the listener.
Since I am more intent on recounting and discussing what the activity of those whom I address brings into existence than what it brings to an end, the reasonable thing to do was first to recount and discuss the condition of what was being terminated, and thereafter that of what was being generated.
However, a problem arises here which ought not to be passed over without discussion. Someone might say: "If love is indeed the effect brought about by these Intelligences whom you address, and the former effect was love no less than the latter, why does their power terminate the one and generate the other? It should rather preserve the former, for every cause loves the effect it produces, and while loving that effect preserves any other which it has already produced."
This objection can be readily countered: the effect brought about by those beings is certainly love, as was said, but since they cannot preserve this except in such subjects as lie within their revolution, they transfer love from what lies outside their power to what lies within it, that is, from the soul that has departed from this life to one living in this life,
just as human nature transfers from father to son the task of preserving itself in the human form because it cannot for ever preserve its effect in the father himself. I use the term "effect" to indicate that the soul and the body together are the effect caused by human nature, for when the soul leaves the body it lives on for ever in a nature higher than human. This, then, is the answer to the objection.
However, now that the immortality of the soul has been touched on I shall make a digression to discuss it, for a discussion of this will be a happy way to say a final word on that one who lives in blessedness, Beatrice, of whom it is my express intention not to speak further in this book.
I declare that of all brutish opinions none is more stupid, more base or more pernicious than the belief that there is no other life after this. For if we go through the whole corpus of writings produced either by philosophers or by others endowed with wisdom, we find that all agree on this: there is in us something that endures for ever.
Aristotle quite clearly affirms this in his work On the Soul; every Stoic quite clearly affirms this; Cicero clearly affirms this, especially in his short book On Old Age; every poet who has written from the standpoint of pagan belief clearly affirms this; every religious group, Jews, Saracens, Tartars, affirm this, as do all others who live according to some form of law.
If all these people were deceived, an impossibility would follow the very discussion of which is repugnant. Everyone is certain that human nature is the most perfect of all natures here below: not only does no one deny this, but Aristotle affirms it when he says that man is the most perfect of all animals.
Since, further, many living beings are entirely mortal (brute animals, for instance), and all such during their life lack the hope of the other life of which we have been speaking, no species of animal would suffer from a graver defect than our own if our hope were empty, for there have already been many of our number who have surrendered this life for that. It would follow, therefore, that the most perfect animal, man, was the most imperfect, which is an impossibility, and that that part of him which is his highest perfection, reason, was the source of his greatest flaw, which is clearly a contradiction in terms.
It would also follow that nature had acted self-destructively in implanting this hope in the human mind, because, as has been said, many people have hastened to meet bodily death in order to live in the other life: this, too, is an impossibility.
Moreover, we constantly have direct evidence of our immortality in the prophetic perceptions we have in our dreams: they could not occur if no part of us were immortal, for, as careful reflection indicates, the source of such revelation, whether corporeal or incorporeal, must be immortal. And whatever is moved or infused with a form by an agent that directly infuses the form must itself bear a proportional similarity to that agent; however, between what is mortal and what is immortal there is no proportional similarity.
Furthermore, certainty is assured us by the utterly trustworthy teaching of Christ, which is way, truth and life: way, because by it we go without hindrance to the happiness to be found in that immortality; truth, because it does not permit of any error; light, because it illumines us who live in the darkness of earthly ignorance.
I declare that it is that teaching more than any other cause which gives us certainty, because he has given it to us who himself sees and measures our immortality. Simply by ourselves we cannot see this perfectly while what is immortal in us is mixed with what is mortal; we do, however, see it perfectly with the eyes of faith, while with the eyes of reason we see it shadowed in obscurity, something which results from the mixing of what is mortal with what is immortal. This ought to be an utterly convincing argument for holding that both of these exist in us; and so I believe, I affirm and I am certain that I shall pass to another, better life after this, where that glorious lady lives with whom my soul was in love when it did battle in the way I shall describe in the following chapter.
