My eyes that grieve because of my heart's anguish have been so afflicted with weeping that now they are exhausted: so if now I would give vent to the grief that brings me gradually to death, I must lament in words. And remembering, gentle ladies, that while my lady was alive I was glad to speak of her with you, I will speak to none but to such gentle hearts as may be found in women; and I shall speak of her lamenting, since she has suddenly departed to heaven, leaving Love with me sorrowing.

Beatrice has departed to heaven on high, to the kingdom where the angels have peace; and now she is with them, having left you here, ladies. It was not the quality of cold that took her from us, nor of heat, as these things take others, but only her great goodness; for a light from her humility passed up through the heavens with such power as to cause the eternal Lord to marvel; so that a sweet desire came to Him to summon such perfection; and He made her come to Him from here below, seeing that this wretched life was not worthy of so noble a creature.

Full of grace the noble soul departed from the fair body, and is now in glory in the place worthy of it. Anyone who does not mourn when speaking of her has a heart of stone, so evil and base that no spirit of kindness can enter it. The mean heart lacks a mind lofty enough to form any image of her, hence no pang of mourning comes to it. But to those who from time to time see in thought what she was, and how she has been taken from us, come sorrow and a desire to sigh and to die of weep­ing; and they strip their souls of every consolation.

My sighs oppress me grievously when thought brings back to my heavy mind the death that has cleft my heart; and often, thinking of death, a desire for it comes on me, so sweet that it makes my face change colour. And when my thought is intensely fixed, then from every side such anguish comes upon me that I start up with the pain I feel; and I am brought to such a state that shame keeps me apart from everybody: and then weeping, alone, in my lament I call on Beatrice saying: ‘Are you now dead?’ And while I call on, her, she comforts me.

