In adolescence this soul endowed with excellence of nature is gentle as well as obedient, gentleness being the second quality necessary in this stage for successfully passing through the gateway to maturity. It is necessary because we cannot live a life which is perfect unless we have friends, and experience indicates that the seeds of our friendships are, for the most part, sown in this first stage, since it is then that a man begins to be gracious, or the opposite. This graciousness is acquired by gentleness in behaviour, which consists of being sweet and courteous in speech, and of being sweet and courteous in serving others and in one's general conduct.
That is why Solomon says to his adolescent son: "Towards the harsh of spirit God acts with harshness, but to those of tender heart He will give grace." And elsewhere: "Do not sully your mouth with evil speech, and keep your distance from every sort of base action." It is clear, then, that we are right in saying that this gentleness is necessary.
The feeling called bashfulness is also necessary in this stage, and so it is displayed in this stage by any nature that is good and noble, as the text says. Since in adolescence bashfulness is one of the clearest signs of nobility, being at that period especially necessary for laying a good foundation for a truly human life (which is what the noble nature strives to ensure), it must be discussed with some care.
I understand by bashfulness three feelings that are necessary for laying the foundation of a good and truly human life. These are awe, modesty and sensitivity to shame – although ordinary people fail to perceive that these are distinct. All three of these are necessary because at this stage it is necessary to display the following characteristics: to be reverent and eager to learn; to be self‑controlled, and so capable of observing the bounds of good conduct; to be penitent for any fault, so as not to become habituated to it. All these qualities flow from possession of the feelings spoken of above, popularly referred to by the single term bashfulness, as I shall now explain.
Awe is the amazement caused in our minds when we see or hear or in any way experience impressive and astonishing things. Because these strike the person who experiences them as impressive, they induce him to reverence them; because they strike him as astonishing, they make him desire to acquire knowledge about them. In ancient times, kings adorned their palaces with magnificent works made of gold and precious stones and wrought with great artistic skill, so that those who saw them might be awestruck, and therefore be reverent and enquire about the rank of honour enjoyed by the king.
Statius, the sweet poet, recounts in his Thebaid that when Adrastus, king of the Argives, saw Polynices clad in a lion's skin, and Tydeus clad in the skin of a wild boar, and recalled the response that Apollo had given concerning his daughters, he was awestruck, and accordingly more reverent and eager for further knowledge.
Modesty is the mind's shrinking from foul actions, accompanied by the fear of succumbing to doing them. We observe it in virgins, in good women and in adolescents, who are so modest that their whole face takes on a pale or red hue not simply on occasions when they are actually invited or tempted to go astray, but even when they might be moved to entertain the mere thought of sexual pleasure.
The poet mentioned above, in the work on Thebes just cited, recounts that when Acestes, the nurse of Argia and Deiphile the daughters of king Adrastus, led them into the presence of their holy father when he had with him the two strangers (Polynices and Tydeus), these virgins became pale and flushed. They averted their eyes from everyone's gaze and kept them fixed only on the face of their father with whom alone they felt secure.
How many lapses this modesty checks! How many obscene topics and proposals it prevents from being voiced! How many dishonourable desires it restrains! How many evil temptations it shames into flight, not only in the modest person but even in the one who sees such! How many impure words it stifles! For as Cicero says in On the Offices, "No act is foul if it is not foul even to mention it", so a man who is modest and noble never speaks in such a way that his words would seem debasing on the lips of a woman. It does indeed ill become a man who is seeking nobility to speak about things which would be unbecoming on the lips of any woman.
Sensitivity to shame is a fear of being held in disgrace for a fault one has committed. This fear gives rise to repentance for the fault, whose very bitterness deters the person from lapsing again. As the same poet recounts in the passage already cited, when Polynices was asked by king Adrastus who he was, he hesitated before speaking because of the shame he felt for the wrong he had done his father, and no less because of the wrongs done by his father Oedipus himself, a father's faults being regarded as an enduring source of shame for the son. Accordingly, he did not mention the name of his father, only those of his ancestors, of his native country and of his mother. It is clear, then, that bashfulness is necessary in this stage of life.
The noble nature in this stage displays itself not only in obedience, sweetness and bashfulness, but also in physical beauty and gracefulness, as the text indicates when it says: And graces its body. It should be explained here that this effect, too, is necessary if we are to live a good and truly human life, for the soul in performing many of its activities has to make use of a bodily organ, and so it performs these well when the body in its various parts is well ordered and properly functioning.
It is when the body has these characteristics that it is beautiful – as a single whole and in each of its parts – for due order in a human being's bodily members conveys a delightful sense of wonderful harmony quite beyond words to describe, and their proper functioning, or health, suffuses them with a colour which is a pleasure to behold.
To say, as I have, that the noble nature beautifies its body and gives it balance and sensitivity is simply to say that it shapes the body into perfect order. It is clear, then, that this quality, along with the others discussed above, is necessary in adolescence. The noble soul, that is, the noble nature, first directs its energies to developing these, thereby fulfilling its role as a seed planted by divine providence, as stated above.
