One can by no means lightly justify serving bread made of barley and not of wheat at a banquet with food of such quality and guests of such distinction; and only a cogent reason will justify setting aside what has long served others well, as has the use of Latin in composing commentaries.
This requires a clearly justifiable reason, because new ways of acting have no guarantee of success, since in their case that experience is completely lacking which has proven the worth of what has been tried and found useful, as regards both means and end.
That is why the Law takes pains to command men to think carefully before setting out on a new path, where it says that "in instituting new laws a clear reason must be advanced for making us depart from what has long been observed."
No one should be surprised, then, if the digression in which I justify my action is long; he should recognize that its length is unavoidable, and should patiently bear this.
It is now clear that both a desire to avoid inversion of the proper order, and whole-hearted liberality, led me to set Latin aside and to write my commentary in the vernacular. So to complete the account of my justification given in outline above, I must now show how I was moved by love for my native language, the third and final reason for my choice.
As everyone's daily experience can testify, natural love moves a lover principally to do three things: to enhance the excellence of the object of his love, to be jealous on its behalf, and, finally, to defend it. These three reasons led me to choose our vernacular, which, drawn both by nature and by incidental causes, I love now as I always have.
My first motive was to enhance its excellence. The following discussion makes clear that I achieve this through the choice I have made. Although there are various kinds of greatness by which the excellence of something can be enhanced, or, more simply, by which it can be made great, nothing makes a thing great so much as its enjoying the goodness proper to it, since this is the mother and preserver of all other forms of greatness.
For man, therefore, there is no higher claim to greatness than that of virtuous activity, which is his proper goodness; through it other forms of greatness are both acquired and preserved, such as true positions of authority, true honours, true powers, true riches, true friends, true and illustrious fame.
This greatness I give to this friend, in that what it possessed potentially and in a hidden way I cause it to possess actually and in an evident way in its proper activity, which is to express the thoughts conceived by our mind.
My second motive was jealousy on its behalf. Jealousy on a friend’s behalf makes one careful to provide for the distant future. Reflecting, then, that to gratify a desire to understand these canzoni some uneducated person would have the Latin commentary translated into the vernacular, and fearing that the vernacular version would be done by someone who would make it appear unattractive (as did the translator of the Latin version of the Ethics, Thaddeus the doctor), I have had the foresight to compose the commentary in the vernacular, preferring to rely on myself than on someone else.
A further motive was to defend it against its many detractors, who disparage it and extol the other vernacular languages, especially Provençal, which they quite erroneously claim surpasses it in beauty and expressive power.
For through this commentary people will be led to recognize the outstanding goodness of the Italian vernacular: they will see the power it has as it expresses the most sublime and original ideas aptly, fully and attractively, almost as well as Latin itself. This power cannot be displayed well in poetry, because of the incidental embellishments belonging to poetry, namely, rhyme and rhythm, just as the beauty of a woman cannot be displayed well when the embellishments of her finery and her clothes, rather than she herself, draw people's admiration.
So whoever wishes best to appreciate a woman should see her when she is graced by her natural beauty, unadorned by any incidental embellishment. Such is how this commentary will appear, in which will be seen the smoothness of the syllables of this language, the precision of its sentences and the pleasant forms of discourse fashioned from it, which will be recognized, by anyone who pays them careful attention, to be full of the sweetest and loveliest beauty.
Since there is no more effective way to expose the weakness and malice of a detractor than to show that these vitiate his intention, I shall put to shame those who find fault with the Italian language, by discussing their motives for doing so. To this I shall now devote a separate chapter, the more thoroughly to discredit them.
