My response to the difficulty is as follows. The desire for knowledge cannot be said to grow in the strict sense, although, as I have shown, it broadens out in a certain way. Whatever grows in the strict sense always remains a single entity. The desire for knowledge does not remain a single entity, it is multiple; and when one desire is satisfied another comes into being, so that, in the broadening out of the desire for knowledge, growth strictly speaking does not occur; rather, what happens is that something small is successively replaced by something large.
For instance, if I desire to know the constitutive principles of physical objects, this desire is fulfilled and brought to completion as soon as I know what these principles are. If I then desire to know with respect to each of these principles how it is composed, and what are its sources, this is another and distinct desire. Further, the occurrence of this new desire does not deprive me of the perfection gained through fulfilling the first desire. Such broadening out does not cause imperfection. In the case of the desire for riches, by contrast, what occurs is growth in the strict sense, since the desire always remains one and the same thing: one entity is not replaced by another, since nothing comes to completion and no perfection is attained.
If my adversary counters: "Just as the desire to know the principles of physical objects is distinct from the desire to know how precisely each principle is composed, so the desire for a hundred marks is distinct from the desire for a thousand", my reply is that this is simply not true. A hundred is part of a thousand, and stands in the same relation to this number as does part of a line to a whole line along which one passes by a single continuous movement, where there is no question of any succession of different entities, nor of movement coming to completion at any point on the line.
By contrast, in the case of knowing the principles of physical objects, and of knowing the composition of each individual principle, these are not parts of one another, and stand in relation to each other as do different lines along which one does not pass by a single continuous movement; rather, when the movement along one line is completed, a distinct movement along another then takes place.
This analysis shows, therefore, that contrary to what is claimed in the difficulty posed, the desire for knowledge does not imply that knowledge itself is imperfect, as does the desire for riches in respect of them, for in the desire for knowledge distinct desires succeed one another, and each reaches completion – which is not the case with the desire for riches. So the difficulty is resolved and has no force.
Another false objection my adversary may well make is the following. Although many desires are fulfilled as a person acquires knowledge, there is no desire that terminates the series. Thus knowledge has, in effect, the same imperfection as the thing in which no termination occurs and which is merely a single entity.
My response is identical: what is claimed in the objection, that there is no desire that terminates the series, is simply not true. As was shown above in the third treatise, our natural desires progress towards a definite end. Since the desire for knowledge is natural, there is a term in which it is fulfilled (although I grant that few complete the day's journey because most stray from the road).
Anyone who grasps what the Commentator is saying in his discussion of Book III of On the Soul will understand that this is his opinion. Similarly, it is this that leads Aristotle in the Ethics to say, rejecting the opinion of Simonides the poet: "The human being should, as far as he can, devote himself to what concerns the divine", a view which indicates that our capacity to know moves towards a definite end. And earlier in that work he declares: "The educated person wants to know things with the measure of certainty that their nature allows", which indicates that we must recognize that there is a limit set not only for the person desiring, but also for the object which he desires to know.
Likewise Paul says: "Do not strive to know more than is fitting; rather, strive to know according to the measure of man's capabilities." So however one understands the desire for knowledge, whether in general or with respect to a particular topic, it reaches perfection. Knowledge made perfect is, then, a noble perfection, and the desire for it does not mar its perfection, as is the case with execrable riches.
I must now show how the possession of these is harmful, this being the third characteristic in which their imperfection is revealed. Their possession can be seen to be harmful on two counts: first, it is a cause of evil; second, it is a privation of goodness. A thing which makes its possessor frightened and hateful, no matter how vigilant he is, is a cause of evil.
How fearful that person is who is aware of having riches about him, whether he is on the road or resting up, not simply when he is awake but when he is asleep, fearing to lose not only his possessions but his very life on their account – this the wretched merchants who travel the world know only too well. When they are carrying riches with them, the mere rustling of leaves in the wind makes them tremble; when they are without them, they feel perfectly safe, and shorten their journey by singing and talking together.
So the Sage remarks: "Were the traveller to set out on his journey empty-handed, he would sing in the presence of robbers." Lucan is of the same mind when he extols poverty for its freedom from care, in the words: "O, ease of mind that a life of poverty brings! O, narrow dwellings sparsely furnished! O, divine riches not yet appreciated! Of what temples or fortifications could this be said: it is Caesar's hand that knocks, yet fearful agitation does not ensue?" (These words are found where Lucan is describing how Caesar, wishing to cross the Adriatic, came by night to the hut of Amyclas the fisherman.)
How great is the hate that people bear towards anyone who possesses riches, either from envy or from a desire to lay hands on those riches! Indeed, so great is this that sons, flouting filial piety, often plot to kill their fathers. Italians in the region of the Po no less than in the region of the Tiber can testify from their own experience to the most gross and manifest examples of this. In his work On Consolation Boethius is moved by this to say: "Without a doubt, avarice makes human beings hateful."
The possession of riches is also a privation of goodness. To possess riches is to fail to act with generosity, which is a virtue; and virtue constitutes perfect goodness, which makes a person resplendent and loved. This he cannot be by possessing riches, but only by relinquishing possession of them. And so Boethius says in the same book: "Money is good only when, transferred to others by the exercise of generosity, it is no longer in one's possession."I have clearly shown, then, that in all their characteristics riches are base.
The person of upright desire and true knowledge, therefore, never loves them. And since he does not love them, he does not link himself to them, but prefers to keep his distance from them, except in so far as they are of use in supplying some essential need. Such an attitude is reasonable, since what is perfect cannot be conjoined with what is imperfect: we know, for instance, that a crooked line is never conjoined with a straight line. (If some juncture does occur, it is not of line with line, but of point with point.)
It follows that the person whose mind is upright (that is, in its desire) and truthful (that is, in its knowledge) is not shattered by their loss, as the text says at the end of this section. In mentioning this effect, the text intends to shows that riches are a river flowing at a distance from the upright tower of reason, or nobility, and that they cannot therefore deprive a person of the nobility he has.The above makes clear how I dispute and refute in the present canzone the claims made for riches.
