While I was still bewildered at my loss of sight,
from the resplendent flame that blinded me
there breathed a voice that caught my ear:
'Until you have regained the sight
you have consumed on me, you will do well
to make good for its loss with speech.
'Begin, and tell what goal your soul has set.
And be assured your power of sight
is but confounded, not forever lost,
'for the lady who guides you through
this holy place possesses in her glance
the power the hand of Ananias had.'
And I said: 'As soon or as late as she wishes,
may the cure come to eyes that were the portals
she entered with the fire in which I always burn.
'The good that satisfies this court
is alpha and omega of whatever scripture
Love teaches me in loud or gentle tones.'
The same voice that had set me free
from fear at my sudden blindness
made me hesitate before I spoke again,
when it said: 'It is clear you need to sift
with a finer sieve, for you must reveal
who made you aim your bow at such a target.'
And I: 'Both philosophic reasoning
and the authority that descends from here
made me receive the imprint of such love,
'for the good, by measure of its goodness, kindles
love as soon as it is known, and so much more
the more of goodness it contains.
'To that essence, then, which holds such store of goodness
that every good outside of it is nothing
but a light reflected of its rays,
'the mind of everyone who sees the truth
on which this argument is based
must, more than anything, be moved by love.
'This truth is set forth to my understanding
by him who demonstrates to me the primal love
of all eternal substances.
'And the voice of the truthful Author sets it forth
when, speaking of Himself, He says to Moses:
"I will make all My goodness pass before you."
'You also set it forth to me in the beginning
of your great message, which, more than any other herald,
proclaims the mystery of this high place on earth.'
And I heard: 'In accord with human reason
and with the authorities concordant with it,
the highest of your loves is turned to God.
'Say further if you feel still other cords
that draw you to Him, so that you may declare
the many teeth with which this love does bite.'
The holy purpose of Christ's Eagle was not hidden.
Indeed, I readily perceived the road
on which he set my declaration on its way.
Thus I began again: 'All those things
the bite of which can make hearts turn to God
converge with one another in my love.
'The world's existence and my own,
the death He bore that I might live,
and that which all believers hope for as do I,
'all these -- and the certain knowledge of which I spoke --
have drawn me from the sea of twisted love
and brought me to the shore where love is just.
'I love the leaves with which the garden
of the eternal Gardener is in leaf
in measure of the good He has bestowed on them.'
As soon as I was silent, the sweetest song
resounded through that heaven, and my lady
chanted with the others: 'Holy, holy, holy!'
As sleep is broken by a piercing light
when the spirit of sight runs to meet the brightness
that passes through its filmy membranes,
and the awakened man recoils from what he sees,
his senses stunned in that abrupt awakening
until his judgment rushes to his aid --
exactly thus did Beatrice drive away each mote
from my eyes with the radiance of her own,
which could be seen a thousand miles away,
so that I then saw better than I had before.
And almost dazed with wonder I inquired
about a fourth light shining there among us.
My lady answered: 'Within these rays
the first soul ever made by the First Power
looks with love upon his Maker.'
As the tree that bends its highest branches
in a gust of wind and then springs back,
raised up by natural inclination,
so was I overcome while she was speaking --
awe-struck -- and then restored to confidence
by the words that burned in me to be expressed.
I began: 'O fruit who alone were brought forth ripe,
O ancient father, of whom each bride
is at once daughter and daughter-in-law,
'as humbly as I am able, I make supplication
for you to speak with me.  You know what I long for.
To have your answer sooner I leave that unsaid.'
Sometimes, beneath its covering, an animal
stirs, thus making its desire clear
by how its wrappings follow and reveal its movement.
In just this manner the very first soul
revealed to me, through its covering,
how joyously it came to do me pleasure.
Then it breathed forth: 'Without your telling me,
I can discern your wishes even better
than you can picture anything you know as certain.
'For I can see them in that truthful mirror
which makes itself reflective of all else
but which can be reflected nowhere else.
'You wish to know how long it is since God
placed me in the lofty garden where this lady
prepared you for so long a stairway,
'and how long it was a pleasure to my eyes,
and the true cause of the great wrath,
and the language that I used and that I shaped.
'Know then, my son, that in itself the tasting of the tree
was not the cause of such long exile --
that lay in trespassing the boundary line.
'In the place from which your lady sent down Virgil
I longed for this assembly more than four thousand
three hundred and two revolutions of the sun,
'and I saw it return to all the lights
along its track nine hundred thirty times
while I was living on the earth.
'The tongue I spoke was utterly extinct
before the followers of Nimrod turned their minds
to their unattainable ambition.
'For nothing ever produced by reason --
since human tastes reflect the motion
of the moving stars -- can last forever.
'It is the work of nature man should speak
but, if in this way or in that, nature leaves to you,
allowing you to choose at your own pleasure.
'Before I descended to anguish of Hell,
 was the name on earth of the Sovereign Good,
whose joyous rays envelop and surround me.
'Later El became His name, and that is as it should be,
for mortal custom is like a leaf upon a branch,
which goes and then another comes.
'On the mountain that rises highest
from the sea, I lived, pure, then guilty,
from the first hour until the sun changed quadrant,
in the hour that follows on the sixth.'