Enough has been said to make the literal meaning of the first part sufficiently intelligible, and so it is time to turn our attention to the second part, which describes my experience of the battle being waged within me.
This part is itself subdivided: first of all, that is, in its first stanza, I give an account of the conflicting thoughts by speaking of their root, which lay within me; then I recount what each of the conflicting thoughts said, and so I first recount what the thought which was losing said, in the second stanza of this part and the third of the canzone, and then what the new thought said, in the third stanza of this part and the fourth of the canzone.
The meaning of the first subdivision will become clear if I explain that things are properly designated by the highest nobility possessed by their form, as man, for instance, is designated by reason and not by the senses or by anything less noble. So when it is said that man lives, this must be understood to mean that he uses his reason, which is the life specific to him and the activity of his most noble part.
So anyone who sets reason aside and uses only his sensitive part lives not as a man but as a beast, a point made by the most excellent Boethius when he says: "He lives as an ass." I quite agree, for thought is the act proper to reason; animals do not think, because they lack that faculty – a description that fits not only the lower animals but those who have a human appearance but the spirit of a sheep or of some other vile beast.
I say, then, that for my heart, that is for my inner self, life used to consist of a gentle thought (gentle [soave] means the same as suasive, that is, attractive, sweet, pleasant and delightful), a thought which would often make its way to the feet of the lord of those whom I address, God Himself; I say, in other words, that in my thoughts I used to contemplate the kingdom of the blessed.
I go on immediately to give the reason why I would ascend to those heights in my thoughts, when I say: Where it saw a lady in glory/i>; these words mean that this happened because I was certain (as I still am) that Beatrice was in heaven, thanks to a gracious revelation from her. And so, spending my time in thought as often as I could, I used to go there as one enraptured.
I then go on to speak of the effect of this thought, in order to convey its sweetness, which was so great that it made me wish for death, that I might go where she had gone; I say this at the words: It would speak to me of her so sweetly that my soul would declare: "I, too, wish to make my way there."
Such is the root of one of the conflicting thoughts within me. I should explain that I use the word "thought" here, and not "soul", of what ascended to see that blessed one, because this was a specific thought consisting of that particular act. As I explained in the preceding chapter, "soul" refers to the generic thought coupled with consent.
When I then say: Now one appears who causes it to flee, I describe the root of the other conflicting thought, recounting that just as the thought spoken of above used to be life for me, so another appears who puts an end to that thought. I use the word "flee" to indicate that the old thought is contrary to the new, for one contrary naturally flees the other, and the one which flees shows that it does so through a lack of strength.
I then declare that this thought which has newly appeared has the power to take possession of me and completely conquer my soul, when I say that it holds such sway over me that my heart, that is, my inner self, trembles, and my outward appearance manifests this in the change it undergoes.
I then indicate the power of this new thought by describing its effect: it makes me gaze at a woman, and speaks alluringly to me; that is, it discourses before the eyes of my intellectual desire in order to draw me more strongly, by promising me that this desire will find its fulfilment in the sight of her eyes.
To make this credible to the experienced soul, it says that no one who is afraid to endure the anguish of sighing should look into the eyes of this lady. It is an appealing rhetorical device when something appears on the surface to be making itself unattractive, while in reality doing the opposite. There was no more telling way for this new thought of love to draw my mind to consent than to discourse profoundly on the power of that lady's eyes.
