Having made clear how reputation expands good and evil beyond the bounds of truth, I must devote this chapter to explaining the various reasons that show why one's actual presence does the opposite and diminishes them. This clarification will lead naturally back to my main theme, the justification spoken of above.
I declare, then, that three causes work to make a person's presence result in his being held in lower esteem than he truly deserves. The first is childishness – in terms not of age but of mind – and the second is envy; these two are features of the person making the judgment. The third is human imperfection, which is a feature of the person judged.
How the first cause operates can be described briefly as follows. Most people act only on the basis of their senses and not of their reason, living at the level of children. Such people have only a superficial knowledge of things, and do not see their goodness, which in each is directed to a given end; this happens because people have closed the eyes of their reason which, with their deeper vision, perceive that end. Consequently, it is only what these people see quickly that registers with them, and their judgment goes no deeper than their sight.
So when on hearsay they form a particular opinion regarding someone's fame, and this turns out to differ from the imperfect judgment they themselves make when that person is present, a judgment formed not on the basis of reason but on the basis of the senses only, they regard what they had heard before as amounting to a lie, and hold in low esteem the person of whom they had previously thought highly.
So for them – who, sad to say, make up the vast majority – a person's presence diminishes his qualities, good or bad. Such people are quickly enthused and quickly sated; they are often happy and often sorrowful on account of trifling pleasures and sorrows; they are quick to become friends and quick to become enemies. In everything they act like children, without exercising reason.
The following makes clear how the second cause operates. In vicious minds equality gives rise to envy, and envy causes false judgment, since it prevents the reason from making a case for the person envied, and the power of judgment then acts like a judge who listens only to one side.
So when such people see a famous person they are immediately filled with envy; they see someone of more or less equal physique and ability, and they fear that his excellence will make them less esteemed.
And not only do they themselves, swayed by their emotions, make a false judgment, but, by defaming the person concerned, they lead others to judge falsely too. The result is that for such people a person's presence always constricts either the good or evil of anyone whom they actually meet. What I say applies to evil, too, in that many people who delight in doing evil envy others of their kind.
Human imperfection is the third cause. This is a feature of the person who is judged, and is not revealed unless people have some familiarity and personal acquaintance with him. To make this point clear it should be explained that a man can be blemished in many ways, and, as Augustine says, no man is without some blemish.
In some people the blemish is due to some passion, which at times they are unable to resist; in others it is due to some physical disfigurement; in still others it is due to some blow of fortune; in others again it is due to the ill repute of their parents or of someone close to them. It is one's presence, not one's reputation, that brings such matters to light, for they emerge in the course of becoming personally acquainted.
These blemishes cast a certain shadow over a person's luminous goodness, and make it shine less clearly and brightly. That is why every prophet receives less honour in his own country; that is why a good man should offer his company to few and familiarity to fewer still, thereby ensuring that his name be well received and not despised.
This third cause can operate as much in the case of evil qualities as of good, provided that causes contrary to those given above are understood at each stage of the process. It is, then, perfectly clear that imperfection, from which no one is free, in everyone's case causes a person's presence to diminish, more than truth warrants, the good and evil he has done.
As for myself, my life, as I indicated above, has led me to be present among almost all the peoples of Italy, so that I am perhaps held in lower esteem than truth warrants, not only by those to whom my reputation has already spread, but by others as well, with the result that anything connected with me has undoubtedly, like myself, been cheapened. Consequently, it is only right that by adopting a loftier style I should endow this present work with a certain gravity in order to lend it more authority. I trust that this justification will be sufficient to excuse any difficulty encountered in my commentary.
