In the third chapter of this treatise I said that I would discuss the great importance to be attached to imperial and to philosophical authority; so now that I have discussed imperial authority, I must continue to make good my word and carry on with this digression by treating of the authority of the Philosopher.
On this topic the proper way to begin is to make clear what the word "authority" means, since there is a greater need of that here than was the case in the discussion of the emperor's authority. The very majesty of the imperial office leaves no doubt of its authority.
"Authority" means "the activity proper to an author (auctore)". This word (auctore, without its third letter, C) can be derived from either of two sources. One is a verb auieo, which has largely dropped out of use in Latin; it has the meaning of "to tie words together". An attentive person will clearly recognize from its form in the first person of the present tense that the word itself makes it own meaning plain, for it consists entirely of what ties words together, that is, entirely of the five vowels. These give form to, or tie together, every word, and this word is composed of them in a flowing movement, so as to form the image of the act of tying together.
For there is an initial swing across from A to U, continued by a movement going directly back through I to E, completed by a swing back across to O, so that an image AEIOU is formed before one's eyes, which is the image of a knot tied. "Author" as having its origin and derivation in this verb is used only of poets, who have tied their words together through the art of music. With the word as used in this sense I am not concerned here.
As Uguiccione indicates at the beginning of his Derivations, the other source from which "author" (autore) is derived is the Greek word autentin, which is equivalent to the Latin meaning "worthy of being trusted and obeyed". As thus derived, "author" refers to every person who is worthy of being trusted and obeyed. From this comes the word with which we are concerned, "authority". It is clear, then, that "authority" means the same as "an activity worthy of being trusted and obeyed". I need only establish that Aristotle is entirely worthy of being trusted and obeyed for it to be clear that his words are of the greatest and most revered authority.
That Aristotle is entirely worthy of being trusted and obeyed can be established in this way. When a number of people direct their activities and skills to ensuring success in a single, ultimate activity or skill, then it is right that the person whose activity or skill is immediately concerned with that ultimate end should most be obeyed and trusted by all the others, since he alone has expert knowledge of the end to which all the other ends are directed. So, for instance, the knight's word ought to be trusted by the sword-maker, the bridle-maker, the saddle-maker, the shield-maker and all others who pursue crafts that are directed to enabling the knight to fulfil his role.
And since all human activities are necessarily directed to a single end, namely, that activity of the human being which is specifically human, the master or expert who shows what that end consists in, and who makes it his special study, most deserves to be obeyed and trusted. This is none other than Aristotle. He, therefore, is most worthy of being trusted and obeyed.
This latter point, that Aristotle is the master and guide of human reason in so far as it seeks its own final end, can be established as follows. From the dawn of time, the finest minds have sought to determine what constitutes this final end that we all naturally desire. However, since there is such a vast number of human beings seeking this end, and within each human being every desire, considered on its own, differs almost completely from the other desires (despite the fact that taken together the desires form a single whole), it proved extremely difficult to discern the end whose attainment would readily satisfy every human desire.
In the very remote past, then, there were some philosophers, among whom the first and most distinguished was Zeno, who came to the conclusion that the end proper to human life is unswerving rectitude. To be more specific, it consists in pursuing unswervingly truth and justice, without regard for anything else whatever, never betraying sorrow or joy over anything, indeed never being deeply affected by anything.
Rectitude they defined as whatever is recognized by reason as being praiseworthy by its very nature, with no consideration given either to usefulness or to profit. These philosophers and their followers were called Stoics, one of whom was the glorious Cato, about whom I did not presume to speak above.
There were other philosophers whose reflections led them to a different conclusion, of whom the first and most distinguished was called Epicurus. He observed that, as soon as it is born, every animal, as if guided by nature towards its proper end, avoids pain and seeks joy, and so he concluded that this end of ours is pleasure, or delight unmixed with pain.
Since he did not allow any middle state between delight and pain, he held that pleasure and the absence of pain were identically. Among his followers, called Epicureans after their master, was Torquatus, a noble Roman, in whose veins ran the blood of the other glorious Torquatus mentioned above.
There were others again, beginning with Socrates and his successor Plato, who observed through more discriminating analysis that in our activities we could, and indeed did, err on the side of too much or of too little. They concluded, therefore, that the end we are discussing is nothing other than our activity when it is without excess or defect, and is measured in accordance with the mean adopted by our choice, this mean being virtue. This end they termed "activity done in accordance with virtue".
These philosophers, such as Plato and Speusippus, his nephew, were called Academics, after the place where Plato pursued his study, the Academy.
However, it was Aristotle (surnamed the Stagirite) and his noted companion Xenocrates of Chalcedon, who, thanks to the unique, one might say divine, intelligence with which nature had endowed Aristotle, refined moral philosophy and brought it to perfection through pursuing their study of this end by much the same method as that of Socrates and the Academics; in this Aristotle played the major role. Since he began to hold public disputations during which he walked up and down, he and his companions were called Peripatetics, or "people who walk around".
Since it was Aristotle who brought this moral doctrine to its final perfection, the name "Academics" was eclipsed, and all who adhered to this school of thought were called Peripatetics. Today the teaching of this group holds sway everywhere, and may almost be said to be the universally accepted opinion. It is evident, then, that Aristotle has directed and led people to the goal we have been discussing. And this is what I set out to show.
To recapitulate: my principal aim has been achieved, which was to show that the authority of the greatest philosopher (the present subject of discussion) entirely merits our assent. Furthermore, his authority does not in any way detract from that of the emperor; rather, the latter authority without the former is dangerous, and the former without the latter is rendered weak, not because of anything intrinsic to it, but because people tend to act irrationally. So when these two operate in unison each is at its most beneficial and carries its fullest weight.
As the Book of Wisdom says: "Love the light of wisdom, you leaders of the people." This may be glossed: "May the authority of the philosopher be united with that of the emperor to produce good, indeed perfect, government."
What wretches you are who govern now! and how wretched, too, are those who are governed! For neither through your own study nor through taking counsel of others does your activity as rulers operate in accordance with philosophical authority, so that the saying of the Preacher is applicable throughout the world: "Misfortune is yours, o country, whose king is a child, and whose princes' first thought is their own pleasure!" And to no country can the words that follow be applied: "Blessed is the country whose king is noble, whose princes concern themselves with the needs of others and not with their own debauchery!"
Enemies of God, you who have seized the rods of government in Italy – yes, it is you I address, King Charles and King Frederick, and the rest of you princes and tyrants – take a good look and see who is sitting at your side to give you counsel. Tell us how many times a day your counsellors call to your attention this end proper to human life! You would do better to fly low like swallows than to wheel on high like kites over things that are utterly base.
