The sweet love‑poetry I was accustomed to seek out in my thoughts I must now forsake; not that I do not hope to return to it, but the proud hard bearing that has become apparent in my lady has barred the path of my usual speech. And so, since it now seems a time for wait­ing, I will lay down that sweet style of mine which I held to in writing of love, and I will speak instead in harsh and subtle rhymes concerning the quality by which man is truly noble; refuting the false and base opinion of those who hold that nobility depends on wealth. And at the outset I invoke that Lord who dwells in my lady's eyes, and thus makes her in love with herself.
There was a ruler of the Empire who maintained that in his view nobility consisted in long‑standing possession of wealth together with pleasing manners; and someone else, of shallower wit; reconsidering this dictum, dispensed with the last little detail lacking it perhaps himself! In his wake follow all those who count a man as noble for belonging to a family which has been very rich for a long time; and so ingrained has this absurd opinion become among us, that people call a man noble who can say: ‘I am grandson, or son, of such and such a great man’, while in himself he's a nonentity. But to those who look at the truth, a man seems doubly base, who, having been shown the right path, then goes astray‑so far astray that he's a dead man walking!
If anyone says: ‘Man is an animate tree’: first what he says isn't true, and then, after the falsehood, he is leaving the definition incomplete‑but perhaps he can see no further. Mistaken in just this way was he who ruled the Empire: for, first he has stated a falsehood and then, this apart, what he goes on to say is deficient. For‑contrary to what is generally believed‑riches can­not either confer or take away nobility, being themselves base by nature: thus he who paints a form, if he cannot ‘be’ it, cannot set it down; nor is an upright tower made to lean by a stream that flows at a distance. That riches are base and defective is clear from this, that in whatever quantity they are amassed, they bring no peace but only increasing anxiety: hence the mind that is upright and truthful is not shattered by their loss.
Now my opponents maintain that a base man can never himself become noble, and that the offspring of a base father can never be reckoned noble: this is what they say. Clearly then their position is self‑contradictory, inasmuch as they make time a factor in nobility, includ­ing it in their definition. Again, it follows from the foregoing that either we are all noble or all plebeian, or else that mankind didn't have one beginning; but this alternative I do not admit, and neither do they if they are Christians. Consequently it is clear to every healthy mind that their statements are groundless; and so, having refuted them as false, I turn away from them. And now I for my part will say what I think about nobility‑what it is, whence it comes, and the distinctive features that a noble person possesses.
I affirm that every virtue stems ultimately from one root, meaning by virtue that which makes a man happy in his actions. This is, as the Ethics states, a ‘habit of choosing which keeps steadily to the mean’‑those are the very words. And I say that nobility by definition always connotes a good in him who has it, as baseness always connotes something bad. Similarly virtue, as defined above, is always understood as good. Hence, since both have the same effect, both concur in one definition. Hence it must be that either one is derived from the other, or each from a third thing. But if one comprehends the other and something else as well, then this is the one more likely to be the origin. And let all this be presupposed in what follows.
Nobility is wherever virtue is, but virtue is not wherever nobility is; just as the sky is wherever a star is, but not e converso. And we see this goodness in women and in the young, in so far as they are held to be shy and bashful, which is something distinct from virtue. Hence each virtue‑or rather the above‑mentioned common factor in virtue‑derives from nobility as perse from black. And therefore let no one boast saying: ‘I am noble because of my birth’; for those who have this grace without any flaw are almost godlike; for it is God alone who gives it to a soul which He sees to be in perfect harmony with her body. Hence it is clear to some that nobility is the seed of happiness placed by God in a well‑disposed soul.
The soul whom this goodness adorns does not keep it concealed; for from the beginning, from the moment she weds with the body, she displays it even until death. In her first age she is obedient, sweet, and bashful, and she adorns her body with the beauty of well‑matched parts. In the prime of life she is self‑controlled and strong, full of love and wins great praise for courtesy, and she takes delight only in observing the law. In old age she is prudent and just, and has a reputation for generosity, and rejoices to hear and speak well of others. Finally, in the fourth phase of life she returns to God as a bride, contemplating the end that awaits her and blessing the stages through which she has passed. See then how many are the deceived!
My ‘Against‑the‑erring’, off you go! And when you come to where my lady dwells, don't hide your mission from her: you can tell her with all confidence: ‘I speak of your friend.’