Having extolled this lady in her entirety, as regards her soul and her body, I go on to extol her specifically as regards her soul. First I extol her in so far as her goodness is something great in itself, and then I extol her in so far as her goodness is something great with respect to others and beneficial to the world. I begin this second part: Of her one may say.
I begin, then, by saying: The divine power descends into her. Here it should be explained that the divine goodness descends into all things; otherwise they could have no existence. But although this goodness proceeds from an absolutely simple source, it is received differently, to a greater or lesser degree, by the things that receive it. And so the Book of Causes states: "The first goodness bestows His manifold goodness on things in a single outpouring."
Each thing, however, receives a share of that outpouring according to the measure of its particular power and essence. Here the sun may supply a model from the realm of the senses. We see that sunlight, which is itself a single thing, derived from a single source, is differently received by the various bodies, as Albert says in his work On the Intellect. For certain bodies, because of the great clearness of diaphanous matter in their composition, become so luminous when the sun strikes them that, through the spread of light in them and in their appearance, they transmit to other things a brilliant reflection from themselves, as is the case with gold and certain stones.
There are other bodies which, because they are totally diaphanous, not only receive the light, but do not impede it; indeed they transmit it to other things coloured with their own hue. Still other things are so overwhelmingly powerful in virtue of the purity of their diaphanous matter that they become so radiant that they overwhelm the harmonious operation of our sight, and cannot be looked at without our eyes becoming strained, as is the case with mirrors. Other things again are so lacking in diaphanous matter that they receive relatively little light, as, for instance, the earth.
Similarly, the goodness of God is received in a variety of ways by different beings: in one way by separate substances, that is, the Angels, who, being without the coarseness of matter, are almost perfectly diaphanous in the purity of their form; in another way by the human soul, which, being partly free from matter yet partly impeded by it, is like a man completely immersed in water except for his head, of whom one cannot say that he is completely in the water nor completely out of it; in another way by animals, whose souls are completely confined in matter, although they are, I grant, endowed with some nobility; in another way by plants; in another way by minerals; and in another way by the earth, a way which differs from that of the other elements, since the earth, being the most material of all, is the most remote from and the most dissimilar to the first, utterly simple and perfectly noble power, who is purely intellectual, God Himself.
Although I have spoken so far only of there being various grades at the generic level, the same can also be said with regard to individuals, in that each human soul receives the divine goodness in a way which differs from that of others. And so in the intellectual order of the universe there is a scale of ascent and descent along almost continuous grades from the lowest to the highest and from the highest to the lowest, just as there is in the sensible world, as we observe. Further, between the angelic nature, which is purely intellectual, and the human soul there is no intervening grade; rather, one is more or less continuous with the other in the scale of grades. Again, between the human soul and the most perfect soul among brute animals there is no gap: we see many men who are so base and have sunk so low that they seem scarcely distinguishable from beasts. Likewise, it must be stated and firmly held that some men are so noble and of such high calibre that they are to be considered more or less angels; otherwise the human species would not be continuous in both directions, which is inconceivable.
Aristotle calls such people divine; and such is what I declare this lady to be, so that the divine virtue descends into her as if into an angel.
When I go on: Let any noble lady who does not believe this, I prove this by referring to the experience of her which may be had in those operations proper to the rational soul into which the rays of the divine light most readily shine, that is, speech and the kind of activity commonly called conduct and bearing. It should be explained here that man is the only animal who speaks and is capable of conduct and activity which are called rational, because he alone possesses within himself the power of reason.
If anyone wishes to deny this, claiming that certain birds speak, as some seem to do (especially the magpie and the parrot), and that some beasts display rational activity or conduct, as seems to be the case with the monkey and with some other animals, then my reply is this: it is not true that they speak or are capable of conduct, because they do not possess the power of reason, from which these must proceed. In them there is no source of such operations, nor do they know what these are, nor do they try to convey any meaning by them: they merely reproduce what they see and hear.
So just as the image of a physical thing is reproduced in some bright body such as a mirror, so that the physical image which the mirror displays is not truly the thing itself, so the semblance of reason, that is, the activity and speech which the animal soul reproduces or displays, is not truly reason itself.
I say "let any noble lady who does not believe what I say accompany her and observe her actions" (I do not say "any man" because it is more fitting to speak of women gaining instruction from a woman than to say this of men) and I describe how women will be affected by her when I speak of the effect created by both her speech and her conduct.
For by its sublimity and sweetness her speech generates in the mind of whoever hears her a thought of love. This I call a heavenly spirit, because in the realm above lies its source and from the realm above comes its meaning, as I have explained; that thought gives rise to the firm belief that she is a woman miraculously endowed with virtue.
And by its gentleness and moderation her conduct causes love to awaken and be felt wherever it exists in a potential state through having been sown by the goodness of nature. (How this natural seeding takes place will be discussed in the following book.)
When I continue: Of her one may say, my intention is to describe how the goodness and virtue of her soul is good for others and beneficial to them. I do this first by saying how she is beneficial to other women: Nobility in a woman is simply what is found in her; here I place before women a clear example, such that, having contemplated it, they will be able to display nobility themselves by imitating her.
Secondly, I explain how she is beneficial to all, saying that her countenance helps our faith, which is something of greater benefit to the human race than anything else whatever, being that through which we escape eternal death and acquire eternal life.
It helps our faith in this way: since the most basic foundation of our faith is the miracles performed by Him who was crucified for us (He who created our reason and willed that it be insufficient to grasp His power) and those performed subsequently by His saints in His name; since, too, many people have become so obstinate that they are doubtful about those miracles because their minds are somewhat clouded, and they are unable to believe in any miracle unless they have visible evidence of it; since, further, this lady is a visibly miraculous being, whom people may daily experience with their own eyes, and she makes the other miracles credible to us, then it is clear that this lady, with her wonderful countenance, helps our faith.
And so I say finally that from eternity, that is, everlastingly, she was ordained in the mind of God to be a witness in support of faith for those who live in this age. This marks the end of the exposition of the literal meaning of the second section of the second major part.
