Now that I have discussed the two kinds of ineffability which mark this subject, I must go on to explain the words concerning my inadequacy. I declare, then, that my inadequacy has a double source, corresponding to the two ways just described in which the grandeur of that lady is transcendent.
For I am constrained by poverty of intellect to leave aside much of that which is true about her and which, as it were, sends a ray of light into my mind, which, like a diaphanous body, receives it without stopping it.
I say this in the short passage beginning: And undoubtedly... I must first lease aside. Then, at the words And indeed much of what it does understand, I say that my inadequacy shows not only with respect to what my intellect is too weak to bear, but even with respect to what I do understand, because my linguistic resources are not rich enough to be able to express the discourse about her taking place in my thoughts; and so it must be recognized that what I shall say reflects but a small part of the truth. To a perceptive person my saying this will greatly redound to her praise – which is my principal goal; and any piece of writing may certainly be said to have been crafted by a rhetorician in which every part plays a role in achieving its principal aim.
When I continue: So if my poems... be wanting, I excuse myself of any blame regarding something for which I ought not to be blamed when people recognize that my words fail to match the worth of this lady. I state that if fault there be in my poems (that is, in such of them as take her as their theme), blame for this is to be attributed to the weakness of the intellect and to the feebleness of our speech, which is defeated by thought in that it cannot follow it fully, most of all when thought springs from love, because then the soul's powers are more deeply engaged than at any other time.
Someone might say: "you excuse and accuse yourself simultaneously", for what has been said is a reason not for exoneration but for blame, in that blame is attributed to the intellect and to the power of speech, both of which are mine, because just as I ought to be praised if these are good so ought I to be blamed if they are bad. To this the brief reply may be given that I truly am excusing, not accusing myself.
It should be stated here that, as the Philosopher explains in the Ethics, man deserves praise or condemnation only with regard to those things which it lies within his power to do or not to do; but with regard to things where he has no such power he deserves neither condemnation nor praise, since both of these are to be attributed to some other cause, even though the things in question form part of man himself.
For this reason we ought not to condemn someone because he is physically ugly from birth, since it did not lie within his power to make himself beautiful; we ought rather to condemn the bad disposition of the matter out of which his body was made, for this was the source of the malfunctioning of nature. Similarly, we ought not to praise someone for any physical beauty he may have from birth, for it was not he who was its cause; we ought rather to praise the one who fashioned it, that is, human nature, which produces such great beauty in the matter it informs when this does not impede it.
And so the priest spoke aptly to the emperor when he mocked and scoffed at the ugliness of the priest's body: "God is lord: it was He who made us, not we ourselves"; these are the words of the prophet, found in a verse of the Psalms, quoted with perfect accuracy by the priest in his reply. And so this point should be taken to heart by those evil, ill-bred men who make it their concern to dress up their bodies but not to adorn their activity, which ought always to be distinguished by goodness: this is nothing less than to adorn someone else's handiwork while neglecting one's own.
Returning to the main theme, then, I declare that our intellect cannot reach up to certain things, such as substances devoid of matter, on account of a lack in the power from which it draws forth whatever it sees: that power, the imagination, is physical, and therefore as regards the kind of knowledge just spoken of it cannot be of help because it lacks the wherewithal. And although we can to some extent speculate about such things, we cannot know them directly, nor fully understand them.
Man is not to be blamed for this, for obviously it was not he who was the cause of this lack; rather, it was caused by universal nature, that is, God, whose will it was to deprive us of such light in this life; to investigate why He should have caused this would be presumptuous.
So if my speculation carried me to the point where the imagination failed the intellect, and I was not able to understand, I am not to be blamed.Furthermore, a limit has been set to our intellect in each of its operations, not by us but by universal nature. It should be explained here that in its power of thinking our intellect has a broader scope than in its power of speech, and a broader scope in its power of speech than in its power of direct signification.
So if any thought of ours, not only such as fails to attain a perfect understanding of its object but even such as does attain to perfect understanding, defeats our power of speech, we ourselves are not to be blamed, for it is not we who are the cause of that.
It is clear, then, that I really do excuse myself when I say: Let blame for that fall on the weak intellect, and on our power of speech, which lacks the ability to express all that Love says, for it ought to be quite evident that on my part there is no lack of goodwill, which is what ought to be considered in determining the merit of human actions. Enough has been said, then, to convey the meaning of the first major, part of the canzone, which has been the matter in hand.
