I have seen the cavalry break camp,

prepare for an attack, make their muster

and at times fall back to save themselves.

I have seen outriders in your land,

O Aretines.  I have seen raiding-parties,

tournaments of teams, hand-to-hand jousts

begun with bells, trumpets, or drums,

with signals from the castle,

with summons of our own and those from foreign lands.

But truly never to such outlandish fanfare

have I seen horsemen move, or infantry,

or ship set sail at sign from land or star.

On we went, escorted by ten demons.

What savage company!  But, as they say,

'in church with saints, with guzzlers in the tavern.'

My attention was fixed upon the pitch

to note each detail of this gulch

and of the people poaching in it.  

Like dolphins, when they arch their backs

above the water, giving sailors warning

to prepare to save their ship,

so from time to time, to ease his pain,

one of the sinners would show his back

and, quick as lightning, hide it once again.

And just as in a ditch at water's edge

frogs squat with but their snouts in sight,

their bodies and their legs all hidden,

so were the sinners scattered everywhere.

But they, at the approach of Barbariccia,

withdrew back down beneath the boiling.  

There I saw -- and my heart still shudders at it -- 

one who lingered, as it can happen

that one frog stays while yet another plunges,

and Graffiacane, who was nearest him,

caught a billhook in his pitchy locks

and hauled him out, looking like an otter.

By now I knew their names,

since I had noted these when they were chosen

and when they called to one another.

'Set your claws to work, Rubicante,

see you rip his skin off,'

shouted all the accursèd crew together.

And I: 'Master, if you can do it,

find out the name of this poor wretch

caught in the clutches of his enemies.'

My leader got up close beside him

and asked him where he came from.  He replied:

'I was born in the kingdom of Navarre.  

'My mother, who had conceived me by a wastrel -- 

destroyer of himself and all his goods -- 

put me in service with a man of rank.       

'Then I joined the retinue of worthy Thibaut:

there first I set myself to taking bribes,

for which I pay the reckoning in this heat.'

And Ciriatto, from whose jaw curved up

on either side a tusk, like the wild boar's,

made him feel how one of these could rip.

The mouse had fallen in with wicked cats.

But Barbariccia blocked them with his arms

and said: 'Stand back and let me jab him,'

then turned to face my master:

'Speak up, if you are eager to learn more,

before I let him have a mangling.'

And my leader: 'Of the other sinners in the pitch,

tell me, is anyone Italian?'

And he: 'I just now came from one

'who hailed from near those parts.  I wish

I still were with him in the pitch -- 

then I'd have no fear of hook or claw!'

Then Libicocco said: 'This is just too much,'

caught him with his grapple by the arm

and, ripping, gouged out a hunk of flesh.

Draghignazzo, too, wanted to catch him up,

by the legs, at which their captain

wheeled round on them with an ugly look.

After their fury had subsided,

my leader seized this chance to ask

the one still staring at his wound: 

'Who is the one you spoke of, from whom

you parted so unwisely when you came ashore?'

And he replied: 'It was Fra Gomìta

'of Gallura, a vessel full of fraud,

who had his master's enemies in hand

but dealt with them so each one sings his praises.

'He took their money and discreetly let them off,

as he himself admits.  And in his other actions

he was no small-time swindler but a king.

'Don Michel Zanche of Logudoro

keeps company with him and, when speaking

of Sardegna, their tongues are never weary.

'Oh, look at that one there, gnashing his teeth! -- 

I would say more, but I'm afraid that demon's

getting set to give my mange a scratching.'

And the great marshal, turning to Farfarello,

who was rolling his eyes, ready to strike,

said: 'Back off, you filthy bird!'

'If you would care to see or hear,'

the frightened spirit then began again,

'Tuscans or Lombards, I can make some come.

'But let the Malebranche stand away

so that the sinners have no fear of vengeance,

and, keeping to my place right here,

'for one of me, I will make seven come

if I whistle, as is our custom

when one of us pulls free out of the pitch.'

At this Cagnazzo lifted up his snout and said,

shaking his head: 'Hear the cunning stunt

he has contrived to throw himself back in!'

And he, with artifice in store, replied:

'I must indeed be cunning if I procure

still greater anguish for my friends.'

Alichino couldn't stand this any more and said,

in opposition to the others: 'If you dive

back in I won't pursue you on the run -- 

'oh no! I'll beat my wings above the pitch.

Let's leave the ridge and hide behind the bank.

We'll see if you alone can take us on.'

Now, reader, you shall hear strange sport.

All turned their backs to where the sinner stood,

he first who'd most opposed the plan.

The Navarrese chose his moment well,

planted his feet and in a second

leaped and escaped from their designs.

At this they all were angry at their blunder,

but most of all the one whose fault it was,

so that he darted up and cried: 'Now you are caught!'

It did him little good, for even wings

could not catch up with terror: the sinner dove

and the devil turned up his breast in flight,

just as the wild duck, when the falcon nears,

dives for the bottom, and the bird of prey

must fly back up, angry and outsmarted.

Calcabrina, furious at this trick,

was winging close behind him, eager for the sinner

to break away as an excuse to scuffle,

and, since the barrator had vanished,

he turned his claws against his fellow

and came to grips with him above the ditch.

But the other was indeed a full-fledged hawk,

fierce with his talons, and the pair of them

went tumbling down into the scalding pond.  

The heat unclutched them in a moment,

but they had so beglued their wings

there was no way to rise above the pitch.

Barbariccia, lamenting with the rest,

had four of them fly to the other bank,

each with his hook in hand, and in no time

on this side and on that they clambered down

to their posts, reaching out their grapples

to the pitch-trapped pair, already cooked to a crust.

And that is how we left them in that broil.

