In accordance with my statement in chapter three of this book that for a proper understanding of the first part of the above canzone it would be necessary to discuss the heavens mentioned there, and those who move them, the three preceding chapters have been given over to this discussion. My opening words, then, address those movers whom I have shown to be the movers of the heaven of Venus: You who move the third heaven by understanding – that is, by the intellect alone, as was explained above – hear the exchange. In using the word hear I am not suggesting that they hear some sound, for these beings do not have sense faculties; in saying hear I am, rather, inviting them to hear in their own way, which is to understand with the intellect.
What I say is: hear the exchange which is taking place in my heart, that is, within me, for as yet it has not been outwardly manifested. I should remark here that throughout this canzone, taken in either of its senses, "heart" is to be understood as referring to one's private inner being, not to some specific part of the soul or body.
After calling them to hear what I have to say, I give two reasons why it is only they whom I may fittingly address. One is the novelty of my condition: since other human beings lack experience of it, it would not be understood by them as it is by those who, in understanding their own activity, understand the effects they cause through it. I touch on this reason when I say: I know of no one else to whom I can relate it, so novel does it seem to me.
The second reason is this: when someone receives either a benefit or an injury he should if possible first mention it to the person who is its source rather than to anyone else, so that, in the case of a benefit, the recipient may show himself grateful to his benefactor, and, in the case of an injury, he may by gentle persuasion move the one who caused it to kindly compassion.
I touch on this reason when I say: Moreover, it is the heaven that responds to your power, noble creatures that you are, which draws me into the state in which I find myself. This means: it is your activity, that is, the revolution you cause, that has drawn me into my present condition. I then draw the conclusion that my words must be addressed to them, as I noted above; I do this where I say: It seems only right, therefore, that in putting into words the experience I am undergoing I should address myself to you. After giving these reasons, I beg their attention, at the words: And so I beg you to attend to what I say.
However, since in any form of address the speaker's principal concern must be to win his audience, that is, to attract it, attraction being the source of all other ways of winning people, as every rhetorician knows; and since, further, a most effective way of winning an audience, as regards first gaining their attention, is to promise to speak of things that are novel and important, I follow up the request made to my audience by saying something winning, that is, by saying something attractive, declaring to them what I intend to do: to speak of something novel – the division I experience within my soul – and of something important – the power of their star. I do this in the final words of the first part: I shall speak to you of the novel condition of my heart, how there my sad soul weeps, and how a spirit, which comes from the rays of your star, disputes with her.
To convey the full meaning of these words I should explain that "spirit" here refers specifically to a recurrent thought whose aim is to commend this new lady and show how attractive she is; "soul" here refers specifically to another thought coupled with consent which, in opposition to the first thought, commends the memory of that glorious lady Beatrice and shows how attractive she is.
It is because the final judgment of the mind, that is, consent, was still in the possession of the thought that worked on behalf of the memory, that I speak of it as soul, and of the other as spirit, just as we customarily speak of a city in terms of those who are in possession of it and not of those who are attacking it, even though both parties are made up of its citizens.
I also say that this spirit is due to the rays of the star. It should be explained here that the rays from all of the heavens are the means whereby the power of the heavens flows down into things here on earth. And since rays are nothing other than an illumination which comes from the source of light through the air until it strikes the thing that is illuminated, and since light exists only in the part of the heaven consisting of the star, because the rest of the heaven is diaphanous (or transparent), I do not say that this spirit (that is, this thought) comes from their heaven as a whole, but from their star.
This star, in virtue of the nobility of its movers, is of such power that it has immense influence on our souls and on everything else pertaining to us, despite the fact that it is so far away from us – the distance being never less than 167 times or more the distance from us to the centre of the earth, which is 3,250 miles.
The above is the literal exposition of the first part of the canzone.
