As I showed above in the third chapter of this treatise, this canzone has three main parts. Now that I have discussed two of these, this thirtieth and final chapter must be devoted to a brief discussion of the third. This consists of a tornata to the canzone, composed to serve as an adornment; it begins, My poem against‑the‑erring, you must be off!
The first point to be noted here is that every good craftsman must, when he finishes a work, ennoble and embellish it to the best of his ability, so that when it leaves his hand its claim to fame and its great merit may be the more evident. This is what I strive to do in this part, not because I myself am a good craftsman, but because I follow the example of such.
Where I say My poem against-the-erring, the phrase against-the-erring is all one word, and is the title of this canzone. I model myself here on the good friar Thomas Aquinas, who entitled one of his works, written to refute the arguments of all those who deviate from our faith, Against-the-Gentiles.
In saying "you must be off", then, what I mean is: "You are now perfectly complete, and it is time to remain still no longer, but to be on your way, for yours is no trivial task." And when you come to wherever our lady dwells, tell her your mission. It should be noted here that, as our Saviour said, one ought not to cast pearls before swine, for this ruins the pearls without benefitting the swine; and, as the poet Aesop says in his first fable, to a cock a grain of wheat is worth more than a pearl, so it ignores the latter and picks up the former.
With this in mind, I caution the canzone to reveal its mission wherever this lady, Philosophy, is to be found. This most noble lady need be looked for only in her room, that is, in the soul in which she dwells. And Philosophy does not dwell only in the wise, but, as was shown above in another treatise, is also to be found wherever love of her dwells. I instruct the poem to make known its mission to all such people, because its theme will be of help to them, and will be welcomed by them.
I say to the poem: "Tell this lady: My theme is your friend." Nobility is indeed her friend, for their love for each other is so deep that nobility always seeks her company, and Philosophy never turns her sweetest gaze elsewhere. What a wonderful and beautiful adornment is given to nobility in the final words of this canzone: to be called the friend of her who in her pristine form exists in the innermost depths of the divine mind.
