Since Love has completely abandoned me‑not by my choice, for never had I been so happy, but because he took such pity on my heart that he could not bear to listen to its weeping‑I will direct my song, thus devoid of love ‑ as I am, against the error which has arisen amongst us of misnaming something which is base and boorish by giving it a name connoting goodness, that is by calling it Charm‑a thing so fair as to make him in whom it reigns fit for an emperor's mantle. It is a sure sign of indwelling virtue; and so I am certain that if I defend it well, by declaring how I conceive it, Love will be gracious to me once more.
There are those who think that to dissipate their wealth is the way to win a place with the worthy who after death continue to dwell in the minds of such as are wise. But their extravagance cannot meet with good men's approval; so that they would be wiser to keep their cash and thus avoid also the loss which is added to their illusion‑theirs and that of those whose opinion of them shows false judgement. Who will not call it folly to guzzle and give oneself over to lechery? To deck oneself out as though one were up for sale at Vanity Fair? For the wise do not esteem a man for his clothes, which are outward adornments, but for intelligence and nobility of heart.
Then there are others who are always laughing, because they want people to think them quick-witted-people, that is, who are deluded on seeing them laugh at something which their own dim minds don't understand.
They speak with affected refinement, go about giving themselves airs, happy to be admired at a distance. They never love any lady whose heart is given to love. In conversation they are tediously facetious. Never would they stir themselves to court ladies in a civilized way, but like a thief to his theft they go to snatch gross pleasures; and this not because charming manners have so completely died out among women that they appear mindless animals.
Although the heavens are in such a conjunction that Charm has gone so far astray‑and more than I have described‑nevertheless, since I am familiar with Charm, thanks to a gentle lady who showed it in all she did, I will not keep silence on it, for that would seem to me so vilely ignoble as to place me among its enemies. Hence, from now on, with more subtle rhymes, I will set down the truth concerning it‑though for whom I do not know. I swear by him who is called Love and who abounds in perfection, that no one can win true praise without practising virtue: therefore, if this my subject -matter is something good- as all say it is‑then it must be either virtue or connected with virtue.
This errant quality is not simply virtue, since it is blamed, even excluded, there where virtue is especially called for -that is, in people of dignity in the spiritual life or whose bent and disposition is learning. Therefore, if Charm is praised in a gentleman, it must be something heterogeneous, caused by several factors: and this is why it must clothe one man well, another badly, whereas simple virtue is becoming in everybody. There is a joy that concurs with love and with perfect behaviour: by these three is true Charm governed, and, so governed, it can endure; like the sun, in whose being concur heat and light and its perfect and beautiful shape.
Charm is like the great planet in all ways: from its rising onwards to its setting the planet pours down life and power with its fair beams into matter here below according as this is disposed to receive them; and so too Charm, disdaining all those who have the outward appearance of human beings but whose fruit does not correspond to their leaves -because of their evil ways- brings like good things to the heart that is noble; being swift to give life with gracious looks and the gracious behaviour it seems to discover afresh at every moment, and swift to give virtue to those who take Charm as their model. O pseudo-gentlemen, vicious and depraved, enemies of this quality which resembles the prince of the stars!
The man chosen by Charm will both give and receive and never be sad at so doing, no more than the sun is sad at giving light to the stars or at receiving their assistance to bring about its effects; all this is a delight both for him and it. He will never be provoked to anger by words, for he only pays heed to those that are worth attention, and his own talk is charming and pleasant. He is held dear and his company desired for his own sake by people of good judgement; and as for the herd, he values their praise just as much as their blame. No honours can make him proud; but on the occasions when it befits him to show his free spirit, then he wins praise. The present generation, without exception, do just the reverse.

