Love, you see well that this lady at no time heeds your force which usually becomes lady of other fair women. And when she saw that she was my lady, by your beam's light on my face, she became lady of all cruelty, so that she seems to have a heart, not of a lady, but of whatever wild beast has its heart most cold to love: for through the hot season and the cold she shows me always the likeness of a lady, made of beautiful stone by hand of the man who carves best in stone.

And I who am firmer than stone in obeying you for the sake of a lady's beauty, bear concealed the blow of that stone with which you struck me, as though at a stone that had a long time irked you, with a blow such that it went to my heart where I am become stone. And no stone has ever been discovered, whether through reflected sunlight or through its own light, that would have sufficient power or light to help me against that stone, to prevent its leading me with its cold to where I shall be cold in death.

Lord, you know that through freezing cold the water becomes crystal stone, there in the north where the great cold is; and there the air is perpetually changing into the cold element, so that there water is lady, because of the cold; likewise, in the presence of that cold face my blood at all times freezes and that thought which shortens my time is all changed into a cold body, which then issues from me by way of the light through which the pitiless light entered.

The light of all beauty is gathered in her, and so too the cold of all cruelty runs to her heart where your light does not reach. And therefore she is alight in my eyes with such beauty when I look at her, that I see her in stone and everywhere I then turn my light. From her eyes comes the sweet light which makes me heedless of every other lady: would that she were a more merciful lady towards me who beg in the night and in the light only place and time to serve her: and for nothing else do I desire to live for a long time.

Therefore, O Power that exists before time, before motion or corporeal light, have pity on me whose time is so wretched; enter her heart at last, for it is high time, so that by your agency the cold may come out of it which does not permit me to have, as others do, my allotted time: for if the time of your strength comes upon me while in such a condition, this noble stone will see me lie down in a small stone never to rise until after time, when I shall see whether there was ever in the world a lady, so beautiful as this cruel lady.



Song, I bear in my mind a lady, such that, though she is a stone to me, she gives me such boldness that all men to me seem cold; so that I dare to create for this cold object the novelty that is alight through your form, a thing never conceived before at any time.





