'Behold the beast with pointed tail, that leaps

past mountains, shatters walls and weapons!

Behold the one whose stench afflicts the world!'

was how my guide began.

Then he signaled to the beast to come ashore

close to the border of our stony pathway.

And that foul effigy of fraud came forward,

beached its head and chest

but did not draw its tail up on the bank.

It had the features of a righteous man,

benevolent in countenance,

but all the rest of it was serpent.

Its had forepaws, hairy to the armpits,

and back and chest and both its flanks

were painted and inscribed with rings and curlicues.

So many vivid colors Turk or Tartar never wove

in warp and woof or in embroidery on top,

nor were such colors patterned on Arachne's loom.

As sometimes barges lie ashore,

partly in water, partly on the land,

and as among the guzzling Germans

the beaver sets itself to catch its prey,

so lay this worst of brutes upon the stony rim

that makes a boundary for the sandy soil.

Its length of tail lashed in the void,

twisting up its forked, envenomed tip,

armed like a scorpion's tail.

My leader said: 'Now we must change

direction for a moment till we reach

that evil beast stretched out down there.'

We descended, therefore, to our right,

and took ten steps along the edge to keep

our distance from the sand and flames.

And, when we reached the beast,

I see some people sitting on the sand

a short way off, near where it falls away.

Then the master said to me: 'So that nothing

in this circle escape your understanding,

go over and examine their condition.

'Let your talk be brief.

While you are gone, I'll ask the beast

to lend us its strong shoulders.'

Thus, on the seventh circle's edge,

still farther out, I went alone

to where the downcast souls were seated.

Their grief came bursting from their eyes.

With restless hands they sought relief,

now from the flame and now from burning sand.

Not otherwise do dogs in summer gnaw and scratch,

now with muzzle, now with paw,

when flies or fleas or horseflies bite them.

Although I searched some of the faces

of those on whom the painful fire descends,

I knew not one, but I could see

the pouches hanging from their necks

were different colors, each with its coat of arms.

On these they seemed to feast their eyes.

And when I came among them and looked closer,

on a yellow purse I could make out

a lion's countenance and form in blue.

Then, farther on, my wandering gaze

made out another crest, blood-red,

marked by a goose more white than butter.

And one, who had a pregnant sow, in azure,

embossed on his white wallet, said to me:

'What are you doing in this ditch?

'Get out of here.  Wait, since you're still alive,

know that my neighbor Vitaliano

shall soon be seated to my left.

'Among these Florentines, I come from Padua.

Many a time they deafen me with shouting:

"May the sovereign knight come soon,

'"who brings the pouch with three goats on it!"'

Then he twisted his mouth and stuck out his tongue

like an ox that licks its nose.

And I, fearing my delay might anger him

who had warned me to keep my stay brief,

turned back and left those weary souls.

I found my leader mounted

on the shoulders of the savage beast.

He said to me: 'Now be strong and resolute.

'From here on we descend such stairs as these.

You mount in front and I will take the middle

so that the tail may do no harm.'

As a man in a shivering-fit of quartan fever,

so ill his nails have lost all color,

trembles all over at the sight of shade,

so was I stricken at his words.

Rebuked by shame, which, in the presence

of a worthy master, makes a servant bold,

I mounted on those huge and ugly shoulders.

I wanted to say -- though my voice did not come out

as I intended -- 'Make sure you hold me fast!'

But he who had helped me many times before,

in other perils, clasped me in his arms

and steadied me as soon as I was mounted,

then said: 'Geryon, move on now.  Let your circles

be wide and your descending slow.

Keep in mind your unaccustomed burden.'

As a bark backs slowly from its mooring,

so the beast backed off the ledge,

and when it felt itself adrift,

turned its tail to where its chest had been and,

extending it, made it wriggle like an eel's,

while with its paws it gathered in the air.

Phaeton, I think, felt no greater fear

when he released the reins and the whole sky

was scorched, as we still see, 

nor wretched Icarus when he felt the melting wax

unfeathering the wings along his back

and heard his father shout: 'Not that way!'

than was my terror when I saw

air everywhere around

and all things gone from sight except the beast.  

On it goes, swimming slowly, slowly

wheeling, descending, but I feel only

the wind in my face and blowing from below.

Now on our right I heard the torrent's hideous roar

below us, so that I thrust my head forward

and dared to look down the abyss.

Then I was even more afraid of being dropped,

for I saw fire and heard wailing,

and so, trembling, I hold on tighter with my legs.

And for the first time I became aware

of our descent and wheeling when I saw

the torments drawing closer all around me.

As the falcon that has long been on the wing -- 

and, without sight of lure or bird

makes the falconer cry out: 'Oh, you're coming down!' -- 

descends, weary, with many a wheeling,

to where it set out swiftly, and alights,

angry and sullen, far from its master,

so Geryon set us down at the bottom,

at the very foot of the jagged cliff,

and, disburdened of our persons,

vanished like an arrow from the string.

