I have made clear the meaning of that part in which the soul speaks, the old thought which is being destroyed. It is time now to proceed to clarify the meaning of the part in which its adversary speaks, the new thought; this part is entirely contained in the stanza beginning: You are not dead.
This part will be better understood if it is recognized that it has two subdivisions: in the first the opposing thought reproaches the soul with being base; then in the second it tells this soul which has been reproached what it must do, beginning with the words: See how compassionate ... she is.
Taking up the final words of the soul, it says: it is not true that you are dead; what makes you think that you are is a bewilderment into which you have basely lapsed because of this lady who has appeared. It should be noted here that, as Boethius says in his Consolation, "no sudden change in one's circumstances occurs without the mind undergoing a certain disorientation" – this is what is meant by the reproach made by the new thought.
This thought is called "a fresh spirit of love" in order to indicate that my power of consent was inclining in its favour; this is further and more clearly indicated, and this thought's victory signalled in advance, when even at this stage it uses the words "our soul", assuming friendship with it.
Then, as was noted, it tells this soul which has been reproached what it must do to regain its self-possession. It says to her: See how compassionate and humble she is, for there are two qualities which are the proper remedy for fear, which is the emotion that clearly has overwhelmed the soul. These are the qualities just mentioned, which, particularly in combination, give assurance of a person's good will; this is especially true of compassion, which makes every other good quality radiant with its light. That is why the greatest tribute which Virgil pays to Aeneas is to call him compassionate.
Nor is compassion what the common people understand by this word, namely, commiserating with someone in his misfortune; this is, rather, one of its particular effects, called pity, which is an emotion evoked in us. Compassion, however, is not an emotion evoked in us, but a noble disposition of mind, receptive to love, pity and other kindly emotions.
It continues: See, too, how wise and courteous she is in her greatness. Here, speaking of those qualities which we human beings can acquire by our own efforts, it singles out three which most draw us to a person. It speaks of her being "wise": now what is more attractive in a woman than wisdom? It speaks of her being "courteous": nothing more becomes a woman than courtesy. And the wretched common people should not remain in ignorance about the meaning of this word either, believing that courtesy means nothing other than liberality: liberality, too, is a particular form of courtesy, not courtesy in its generic sense.
Courtesy and human goodness are one and the same thing; it was because virtues and fine manners were the normal form of conduct in the courts of ancient times – as are their opposites nowadays – that this word was derived from the courts, and courtesy was taken to mean precisely the normal form of conduct at court. Were this word nowadays to be derived from the courts, especially of Italy, it would mean quite simply degradation.
The new thought says in her greatness. Social greatness, which is what is referred to here, most becomes a person when it is accompanied by the other two good qualities just spoken of, because it sheds a light that brings into clear relief the goodness of a person, or the opposite. What wisdom and personal virtue go unnoticed because this light is lacking! What senselessness, what vices stand revealed because this light is possessed!
It would be better for the great ones who lead base lives to be of lowly estate, senseless, stupid and vicious as they are, for then neither during their life nor after their death would they be so infamous. It is undoubtedly with them in mind that Solomon says in Ecclesiastes: "And another evil I saw under the sun, of the worst kind: riches possessed to their owner's harm."
It goes on to instruct her (that is, my soul) to call that woman her lady from now on, promising her that this will bring her great happiness, when she becomes aware of the lady's manifold beauty; it says this at the words: For, if you banish self‑deceit, you will witness. It continues this same theme to the end of the stanza. This completes the literal meaning of all that I say in this canzone when addressing those heavenly Intelligences.
