Pitiless memory, ever gazing back at the time that is past, assails my heart on the one side; on the other, with the power of Love, is the love‑longing that draws me towards the dear place which I have left. Nor, gentle lady, do I feel that I have the power in me to resist for long, unless such power come from you; hence if it is fitting that you sometimes take action to rescue my heart, send your greeting, I beg you, to restore its strength.
I beg you, my lady, do not fail in this emergency the heart that loves you so, since from you alone does it look for help. A good lord will not draw rein when riding to the help of the servant who calls on him; it is not only the latter he thus defends, but his own honour as well. And certainly my heart's pain burns me the more when I consider, lady, that you are depicted therein by the hand of Love: which is a reason for your caring the more for it, if He who is the norm of all goodness holds us the dearer for being made in His image.
Were you to say, my sweet hope, that you will make me wait for what I ask of you, know that I cannot wait -I am at the end of my strength. And this you ought to recognize, since it is my last hope that I have begun to look to now: for a man ought to sustain every burden, short of such as would kill him, before appealing to his best friend, since he does not know how his friend may be disposed; and should the response be unkind, then nothing could be bought at greater cost he will die of it, and the more swiftly and bitterly.
And you, yes you, are the one I love above all, and who can make me the greatest gift of all, and in whom above all my hope dwells: and it is only to serve you that I desire life, and I ask and desire only that which may be to your honour‑ all else is wearisome. You can give me what no one else can, for Love has put into your hands the power of life and death over me, and in this I glory. The trust I place in you comes from the human kindness that shows in you; for everyone who looks at you knows with certainty from your outward bearing that compassion dwells within you.
Therefore let your greeting now come forth, and come into my heart that awaits it, my gentle lady, as you have heard. Only let it know that my heart's entrance is securely locked by that arrow which Love shot on the day that I was taken; so that entrance is denied to all except the messengers of Love ‑they can open it by will of the Power that keeps it locked: hence, tormented as I am, the arrival of your greeting would only harm me should it not be accompanied by the messengers of the Lord who has me in his power.
Song, you must travel swiftly, for you know well that there is little time left now to bring about what you are going for.

Congedo.