Love, who send down your power from heaven as the sun does its splendour ‑for the greater the perfection of what its beams encounter, the more its influence takes effect: and just as it dispels darkness and cold, so do you, mighty Lord, drive baseness from the heart, nor can ill ‑humour resist you for long‑ it is from you, Love, that every good must proceed for which the whole world strives; without you all the good we might do is defeated ‑like a picture in a dark place unable to show itself and give delight with colour and artistry.
Your light has struck ceaselessly into my heart, as sunbeams strike the stars, since first my soul became servant to your power. And this gives life to a desire that leads me on with its gentle speech to gaze at all beautiful things, and with greater delight the more beautiful they are. And through this gazing a young woman has entered my mind and taken me captive; she has lit a fire there, just as water, through its clarity, kindles flame; because at her coming your beams, which she reflects on to me, all leaped back up to her eyes.
Beautiful as she is in her being and noble in her bearing and worthy of love, so and not less does my restless imagination adorn her in the mind where I bear her; not that of itself it has the sensitivity to apprehend so sublime an object, but from your power it receives what it is now enabled to do beyond the capacity that Nature gives us. Her beauty is a proof of your nobility inasmuch as one can form a judgement about an effect when it is realized in matter disposed to receive it. In the same way, the sun is the term to which fire refers; for fire neither gives power to nor removes it from the sun, but, operating in a different place, it makes the sun's beneficence the more apparent in this its effect.
So then, O Lord, whose nature is so noble that whatever nobility is realized here below and every other form of goodness draw their origin from your majesty, consider how hard is my life and take pity on it; for your fervour that comes to me through her beauty brings un­bearable suffering into my heart. Make her feel with your sweetness, Love, the great longing I have to see her. Do not permit her to bring me to death by her youth; for she is not yet aware how fair she is, nor how intensely I love her, nor that in her eyes she bears my peace.
If you help me, you will receive much honour and I a precious gift ‑since well I know that I have come to a point where I can no longer defend my life; for my spirits are assailed by a woman who is such that, unless it be your will that they should be spared, I do not think they can long survive. And further, your power will be felt by this fair woman who is worthy of it; for clearly it is fitting to bestow on her a great retinue of all good things, born as she was into the world to hold sway over the mind of all who contemplate her.
