The fairest branch that springs from the root of reason is discretion, for, as Thomas says, commenting on the prologue to the Ethics, "To know how one thing is related to another is the distinctive act of reason", and such is precisely what discretion is. One of the fairest and most delightful fruits on this branch is the respect owed by the lesser to the greater.
Cicero expresses this view in On the Offices when, speaking of the beauty that shines out from rectitude, he declares that respect is part of that beauty. And just as respect belongs to the beauty of rectitude, so its opposite, which in the vernacular may be termed disrespect or arrogance, defiles and detracts from rectitude.
As Cicero himself says in that same passage: "To make no effort to find out what others think of one is the mark of someone who is not simply arrogant but dissolute." This implies nothing less than that to be arrogant and dissolute is to lack knowledge of oneself – which is the very source and measure of all respect.
That is why I, who fully respect both the prince and the Philosopher, proceed in the following way: my aim is to eradicate evil from the mind of some, and replace it with the light of reason, but before proceeding to refute the opinions given above, I shall make it quite clear that in doing so I am saying nothing disrespectful about either the imperial majesty or the Philosopher.
After all, if I were to show myself disrespectful anywhere in this work, there is nowhere I could do so less appropriately than in this particular treatise: since I am dealing here with nobility, my bearing ought itself to be marked by nobility, not baseness. I shall, in turn, make it clear that I am not setting myself up against either the authority of the Philosopher or that of the imperial majesty.
Where the Philosopher says, then, "What most people judge to be true cannot be wholly false", he is not referring to the superficial judgment formed by the senses, but to the interior judgment made by reason. For judgment formed by the senses is, in most people, often quite false, especially with regard to things that are perceived by the several senses together, since in these cases what the senses report is very frequently mistaken.
We know, for instance, that to most people the diameter of the sun appears to be one foot across, but this is quite false; human reason, making observations and discoveries with the various skills at its command, has shown that the diameter of the body of the sun is five-and-a-half times that of the earth. Where the earth is 6,500 miles in diameter, the diameter of the sun, which to judgments formed by the senses is one foot across, is in fact 35,750 miles across.
It is clear, then, that Aristotle was not referring to judgment formed by the senses. So if my aim is to disprove a judgment formed by the senses, I am not going against what was intended by the Philosopher, nor, consequently, am I in any way wanting in the respect which is due to him.
It is, in fact, clear that what I intend to refute is a judgment formed by the senses, for those who hold the opinion noted above judge by taking into account only what their senses inform them about things that fortune can give and take away. For when they see family connections being made through high marriages, when they see wonderful buildings, large estates and mighty lordships, they believe that these are the source of nobility; indeed they think these to be the very essence of nobility. Were they, on the other hand, to judge on the basis of rational knowledge, they would say the contrary, that it is nobility that is the source of all this, as I shall show in this treatise.
And just as I do not speak disrespectfully of the Philosopher in refuting the above view, as is by now apparent, neither do I do so with regard to the emperor; and I intend to give the grounds for this claim.
If I am to show that I am not disrespectful towards the imperial majesty, I must first clarify what "respect" is. Respect is simply the acknowledgment, through some evident sign, of submission that is owed. Once this is grasped, a distinction has to be made between "being disrespectful" and "not being respectful". Being disrespectful is a case of privation, whereas not being respectful is a case of negation. Being disrespectful, therefore, is failing to acknowledge, by some evident sign, submission that is owed; not being respectful is denying that any submission is owed.
A person can reject something in two quite different ways: either he can reject it and thereby go contrary to the truth, so that acknowledgment that is owed is positively lacking – this is "failure to acknowledge" in its proper sense; or a person can reject something without going contrary to the truth, so that what does not exist is simply not acknowledged – this is "denial" in its proper sense. For instance, if a man rejects the view that he is completely mortal, this is a denial in its proper sense.
So if I deny respect to the emperor, it is not that I am being disrespectful; I am simply not being respectful. In doing this I am not acting contrary to respect, since my denial is not directly opposed to respect. Consider a parallel case: not having life is not directly opposed to being alive; what is directly opposed to being alive is being dead, which is the privation of life. Consequently, being dead and not having life are not identical.
For instance, it is quite rightly said of stones that they do not have life. And since being dead is a case of privation, which can obtain only with regard to a subject of which the attribute in question is characteristic, and stones are not a subject of which being alive is characteristic, it may properly be said of them not that they "are dead", but that they "do not have life". Similarly here: since I do not owe respect to the emperor in this matter, in denying respect to him I am not being disrespectful; I am simply not being respectful, which implies no arrogance and merits no blame.
Indeed it would imply arrogance were anyone to be respectful to the emperor in this matter (if one can speak of respect in this context), since in so doing he would fall into a more serious and genuine disrespect, namely, towards nature and towards the truth, as we shall see below. Aristotle, the master of philosophers, guarded himself against this fault at the beginning of the Ethics, when he said: "If we have to choose between two friends, one of whom is the truth, then we must side with the truth."
However, since I have said that in this matter I am not being respectful, which is a denial of respect, that is, a denial that submission by some evident sign is owed, I must show how my attitude is in fact a case of denial and not of failure in acknowledgment. I must, in other words, show how in this matter I do not owe submission to the imperial majesty. Since I can show this only by a lengthy discussion, I shall now devote a separate chapter to this topic.
