I have said that the ancients did not perceive the truth about spiritual creatures because they lacked instruction, although I grant that the people of Israel did receive some instruction from their prophets "through whom God had spoken to them in a great variety of ways", as the Apostle says.
We, however, have been instructed on the realm of the spiritual creatures by him who came from there, by him who made these creatures, by him who conserves them in being, that is, by the Emperor of the universe, Christ himself; he, the beloved son of the sovereign God and beloved son of the Virgin Mary (herself truly a woman, the daughter of Joachim and of Adam) was truly a man, who was put to death by us and thereby brought us life.
"He was a light that illumines us who dwell in darkness", as John the Evangelist says; he taught us the truth about things which, without his help, we should not have been able to know or perceive truly.
His first revelation concerning them, and their life that lies hidden, to us, consisted in the very appearance of one of these creatures, namely, of that great ambassador of his who came to Mary, a young girl of thirteen years, on behalf of the heavenly Healer. This Saviour of ours declared with his own lips that the Father could send him many legions of angels; he did not demur when it was said to him that the Father had commanded the angels to minister to his needs and be at his service.
That is why it is clear to us that these creatures exist in immense numbers; that is why his spouse and confidant, Holy Church, states, believes and preaches that those most noble creatures exist in virtually countless numbers. She divides them into three hierarchies, that is, into three holy or divine principalities, each hierarchy itself having three orders; in fine, the Church holds and affirms that there are nine orders of spiritual creatures.
The first is that of the Angels, the second that of the Archangels, and the third that of the Thrones; these three orders comprise the first hierarchy – not first in respect either of nobility or of creation, for the others are certainly more noble than they and all were created together, but first in respect of our movement upwards towards their level of being. Then come the Dominations, followed in turn by the Virtues and the Principalities; these comprise the second hierarchy. Above these come the Powers and the Cherubim, and highest of all, the Seraphim; these comprise the third hierarchy.
Both the number of the hierarchies and the number of the orders enable us with great confidence to give an account of their contemplation. For since the divine Majesty exists in three persons who constitute a single substantial being, the contemplation of these persons can take three forms.
The supreme power of the Father can be contemplated; on this the first hierarchy gazes, that is, the hierarchy that is first in nobility and last reckoning from our position. The supreme wisdom of the Son can be contemplated; on this the second hierarchy gazes. The supreme and burning love of the Holy Spirit can be contemplated; on this the lowest hierarchy gazes, the hierarchy which, being closest to us, offers us a share of the gifts it receives.
Since, further, each person of the divine Trinity can be considered in three ways, each hierarchy contains three orders which contemplate in different ways. The Father can be considered simply with respect to himself; this is the contemplation proper to the Seraphim, who see the First Cause more fully than any other angelic nature.
The Father can be considered in terms of his relationship to the Son, that is, with respect to how the Son comes forth from him and how he is united to him; this the Cherubim contemplate. Again the Father can be considered in terms of the procession of the Holy Spirit from him, with respect both to how the Spirit comes forth from him and how he is united to him; this is the contemplation proper to the Powers.
Both the Son and the Holy Spirit can be contemplated. in a similar way. There must, therefore, be nine kinds of contemplative spirits who gaze into that light which alone sees itself completely.
A word should be said here on certain other topics. A proportion of each of these orders, perhaps a tenth, damned themselves as soon as they were created; human nature was then created to make good this loss. The moving heavens, nine in all, speak of the numbers, orders and hierarchies; the tenth proclaims the very unity and stability of God. As the Psalmist says: "The heavens speak of the glory of God, and the firmament proclaims the work of His hands."
It is, then, reasonable to hold that those who move Mercury are the Archangels, and those who move Venus are the Thrones. These last, whose very nature it is to love the Holy Spirit, imbue with an abundance of love the activity which is proper to them and is of a kind with their nature, namely, the movement of that heaven. From this love the form of that heaven takes on a powerful ardour through which it enkindles love in souls here below, to the degree that they are disposed to receive it.
The ancients, recognizing that it was that heaven which caused love here below, called Love the son of Venus, as Virgil testifies in the first book of the Aeneid, where Venus says to Love: "Son, my power, son of the supreme father, who care nothing for the arrows of Typhoeus", as does Ovid in the fifth book of the Metamorphoses, when he portrays Venus as addressing Love with the words: "Son, my weapons, my might."
And these Thrones, who have been assigned the governing of this heaven, are few in number. Philosophers and astronomers have different opinions regarding the revolutions of this heaven; all, however, agree on this, that there are as many of them as there are movements made by the heaven.
According to the summary account in the Aggregation of the Stars of the best demonstration provided by the astronomers, there are three movements: one, according as the star moves along its epicycle; another, according as the epicycle moves with the entire heaven in concert with the movement of the Sun; a third according as that entire heaven moves from west to east following the movement of the Sphere of the Stars, one degree every hundred years.
To these three movements correspond three movers. In addition, this entire heaven with the epicycle moves in a revolution from east to west, once each natural day. Whether this movement is caused by an Intelligence or by the mighty impetus of the First Moving Heaven, is something God knows; it is a topic on which it seems to me presumptuous to make a judgment.
Each of these movers brings about simply by an act of understanding the revolution of the particular heaven which it moves. The form of the heaven, which is of the highest nobility, possesses in itself a principle whose nature is to be receptive to this movement, and revolves at the touch of the moving power whose understanding is concerned with this heaven. These are the movers to whom the words of my poem are directed, and of whom I make my request.
