In form, then, of a luminous white rose
I saw the saintly soldiery that Christ,
with His own blood, took as His bride.
But the others -- who, even as they fly, behold
and sing the glory of Him who stirs their love,
and sing His goodness that raised them up so high,
as a swarm of bees that in one instant plunge
deep into blossoms and, the very next, go back
to where their toil is turned to sweetness --
these descended to the splendid flower,
adorned with many petals, and then flew up
to where their love forever dwells.
Their faces were of living flame,
their wings were gold, the rest
was of a whiteness never matched by snow.
When they descended to the flower, they bestowed
the peace and love acquired with their beating wings
upon the petals, row on row.
Nor did so vast a flying throng,
coming between the flower and the light above,
obstruct the looking up or shining down,
for the light of God so penetrates the universe,
according to the fitness of its parts to take it in,
that there is nothing can withstand its beam.
This sure and joyful kingdom,
thronged with souls from both the old times and the new,
aimed sight and love upon a single goal.
O threefold Light, which, in a single star
sparkling in their sight, contents them so! 
Look down upon our tempest here below.
If the barbarians, coming from that region
which Helice covers every day,
wheeling with her son, in whom she takes delight,
were dumbstruck at the sight of Rome
and her majestic monuments,
when the Lateran surpassed all other works of man,
I, who had come to things divine from man's estate,
to eternity from time,
from Florence to a people just and sane,
with what amazement must I have been filled!
Indeed, between the wonder and my joy, I was content
neither to hear nor speak a word.
And, as a pilgrim, in the temple of his vow,
content within himself, looks lovingly about
and expects to tell his tale when he gets home,
so, through the living light I let my eyes
range freely through the ranks, now up, now down,
now circling freely all around again.
I saw visages informed by heavenly love, resplendent
with Another's light and their own smiles,
their every movement graced with dignity.
My gaze by now had taken in
the general form of Paradise
but not yet fixed on any single part of it,
and I turned, with newly kindled eagerness
to ask my lady many things
that kept my mind yet in suspense.
I expected one thing but found another:
instead of Beatrice, an old man, adorned
as were the rest of those in glory, met my eyes.
His eyes and cheeks were quite suffused
with kindly joy, and from his whole appearance shone
a loving father's tenderness.
Then 'Where is she?' I asked at once
and he replied: 'To lead your longing to its goal
Beatrice called me from my place.
'If you raise your eyes to the third circle
below the highest tier, you shall see her again,
now on the throne her merits have assigned.'
Without a word, I lifted up my eyes
and saw that she, reflecting the eternal rays,
appeared to be encircled by a crown.
From the highest region where the thunder breaks
down to the bottom of the deepest sea,
no mortal eye is ever quite so far
as was my sight removed from Beatrice.
Yet to me that mattered not, because her image
came down undimmed by anything between.
'O lady who give strength to all my hope
and who allowed yourself, for my salvation,
to leave your footprints there in Hell,
'of all the many things that I have seen,
I know the grace and virtue I've been shown
come from your goodness and your power.
'It is you who, on no matter what the path,
have drawn me forth from servitude to freedom
by every means that you had in your power.
'Keep your munificence alive in me, so that
my soul, which you have healed,
may please you when it leaves its mortal frame.'
This was my prayer.  And she, however far away
she seemed, smiled and looked down at me,
then turned again to the eternal fountain.
And the holy ancient spoke: 'So that you may achieve
your journey's consummation now,
both sacred love and prayer have sent me here: 
'Let your sight fly through this garden,
for seeing it will help prepare your eyes
to rise, along the beam of holy light.
'And Heaven's queen, for whom I burn
with love, will grant us every grace,
since I am her own, her faithful Bernard.'
As the man who, perhaps from Croatia, has come
to set his gaze on our Veronica,
his ancient craving still not satisfied,
and who thinks to himself while it is shown:
'My Lord Jesus Christ, God Himself,
was this then how You really looked?',
just so was I, gazing on the living love
of him who, still within the confines of this world,
in contemplation tasted of that peace.
'Child of grace,' he said, 'you will not know
this joyful state if you maintain your gaze,
instead of upward, fixed down here.
'Rather to the highest circles raise your eyes
so that you may behold the queen enthroned,
her to whom this realm is subject and devout.'
I raised my eyes.  As, at break of day,
the eastern part of the horizon shines
with a brighter glow than where the sun goes down,
so, as though my eyes were moving from a valley
up a mountain, I saw that one far crest
surpassed in brightness all the others.
Where we await the shaft of Phaeton's car,
poorly guided there, where it is most aflame,
while on this side and on that the light shades off,
just so that peaceful oriflamme showed brightest
in the middle, while on either side
the flame was dimmed in equal measure.
Around that point I saw more than a thousand angels,
their wings outspread, in joyful festival,
each distinct in brightness and in motion.
I saw there, smiling at their games and songs,
beauty that brought pleasure to the gaze
of all the other gathered saints.
Were I as rich with words as in my store of images,
I still would never dare attempt to tell
the least of these delights that came from her.
Bernard, who saw my eyes were fixed, intent
upon the very fire that made him warm,
turned his own on her with such affection
that he made mine more ardent in their gaze.