In the passage that immediately follows, beginning Therefore, as perse derives from black, the text goes on to give the definition of nobility that we are seeking; this will enable us to perceive what this nobility really is, about which false opinions are so widely propagated. Drawing a conclusion from the previous discussion, it says that all virtues, or rather their common source (the habit of choice that keeps to the mean), will come from it, that is, from nobility.
The text presents an analogy taken from the realm of colour: just as perse is derived from black, so this quality (virtue) is derived from nobility. Perse is a colour that is a blend of purple and black, but with black predominating, so that perse is designated by a term similar to black; since virtue, likewise, is a blend of nobility and feeling, but with nobility predominating, virtue is designated by a term similar to nobility, and is, in fact, called excellence.
The canzone continues by arguing, on the basis of what has been said, that no one is entitled to regard himself as possessing nobility because he can say "I come of a noble family-line", if he is lacking the fruits described above. It goes on immediately to justify this statement by declaring that those who possess this grace or divine quality seem to be like gods, unblemished by any vice. Such a gift can be bestowed only by God, who shows no deference to persons of rank, as the Scriptures make clear.
Nor should anyone think it rhetorical exaggeration when the text says Because those... are like gods, for, as was shown above, just as there are some people so thoroughly base as to be bestial, so there are others so thoroughly noble as to be divine, as Aristotle proves in the Ethics by the passage he cites from the poet Homer.
So let no member of the Uberti family of Florence, or of the Visconti family of Milan, claim: "Since I come of a noble family-line, I, too, am noble", for the divine seed does not descend into a stock or family-line; it descends, rather, into individual people, and, as will be shown below, it is not a family-line that makes individuals noble, but individuals who ennoble a family-line.
With the words For God alone bestows it on that soul the text goes on to speak of the recipient or subject into whom this divine gift descends. Nobility is justifiably called a divine gift, because the Apostle himself says: "All the highest favours and every perfect gift come from above, descending from the Father of lights."
The text says, then, that God alone infuses this grace into the soul which he sees to be subsisting perfectly in its body, ready and disposed to receive this divine act. As the Philosopher says in On the Soul: "Things must be disposed towards the beings that act upon them if they are to be receptive to their activity." So if the soul is imperfectly placed, it is not disposed to receive this blessed, divine infusion, just as any precious stone that is badly disposed or imperfect cannot receive the power that emanates from the heavens.
The soul may subsist poorly in its body because of some defect in the constitution of the bodily elements, or perhaps because of some defect in the seasonal circumstances; such a soul never reflects this divine radiance. It may be said of all those whose soul lacks this light that they are like valleys facing north, or like underground caves, which sunlight never reaches except as reflected from somewhere else that is illuminated by that light.
Finally, the text draws the conclusion from what has previously been said (that the virtues are a fruit of nobility, and that God infuses this into the soul that is well situated in its body): it is clear to some, namely, to those few whose minds are active, that human nobility is nothing less than "the seed of happiness", infused by God into the soul that is well placed, that is, into the soul whose body is in every way perfectly disposed in its regard. Granted the above, that the virtues are a fruit of nobility and that happiness is sweet delight attained through them, it clearly follows that nobility is indeed the seed of happiness in the way just stated.
Careful consideration will show that this definition embraces all four causes of nobility, namely, the material, formal, efficient and final: the material cause, in the words in the soul that is well placed, for the soul is the matter or recipient of nobility; the formal cause, in the word seed; the efficient cause, in the words infused by God into the soul; the final cause, in the words of happiness. This, then, is the definition of our distinctive human excellence, which descends into us from the highest or spiritual Power, as does power into a precious stone from the noblest heavenly bodies.
