Finally, as was expressly indicated above in the commentary when I divided this canzone into its main parts, I turn in the person of my words to face the canzone itself and speak to it.
This part will be more fully understood if I explain that in the canzone form this part is generally called the "tornata" because the poets who introduced the custom of composing it did so in order that, once the canzone itself had been sung, they might turn and address it, using part of the song to do so.
I, however, have seldom had that intention in composing this part, and to indicate this I have rarely introduced it into the scheme of the canzone as part of the metre required to complete the musical form; I have composed one when something additional to the theme of the canzone itself needed to be said, as can be seen in this or in any of the other tornatas which I have composed.
So, in this present case, I declare that the goodness and the beauty of what is said are always quite separate and distinct from each other: the goodness is found in the meaning, and the beauty in the verbal artistry; both bring delight, though goodness is supremely delightful.
Consequently, since the goodness of this canzone was difficult to perceive on account of the different people who are brought forward to speak, something which requires many distinctions, while its beauty was easy to see, it seemed to me necessary to add to the canzone something to the effect that the ordinary run of people should concentrate on its beauty rather than on its goodness. This is the point I make in this part.
However, since it often happens that to admonish appears presumptuous, the rhetorician faced with certain situations usually speaks to his audience indirectly, addressing his words not to the one for whose sake they are spoken but to someone else. This is in fact the approach I adopt here, for the words are addressed to the canzone, and their meaning to human beings.
What I say, then, is: canzone, I believe that those who may understand you well are rare, that is, few in number. I give a twofold reason for this: first, because you are exacting in what you say (I call her exacting for the reason given above); second, because you are difficult in what you say (I call her difficult in view of the novelty of content).
I go on immediately to admonish her, saying: if you chance to come into the company of people who seem to you to be perplexed as to your meaning, do not lose heart, but say to them: since you cannot see my goodness, at least recognize my beauty.
What I wish to say here, as I indicated above, is simply this: O people who cannot grasp the meaning of this canzone, do not for that reason spurn it; rather, recognize the great beauty it has: in syntax, the province of grammarians, in the structure governing its presentation, the province of rhetoricians, and in the rhythmical form of its parts, the province of musicians. These features in her can be appreciated as beautiful by every attentive observer.
This completes the account of the literal meaning of the first canzone, which was presented above as the first course.
