After proving, with the help of the very opinion they hold, that time is not constitutive of nobility, the canzone goes on to refute that opinion itself, in order to eliminate all trace of the rust of their fallacious reasoning from any mind open to the truth. I do this when I say: Furthermore, it follows from the foregoing.
The nub of my argument is that if a person cannot change himself from base to noble, or a noble son cannot be the offspring of a base father, as their opinion requires, one of two absurdities must follow: either that there is no such thing as nobility; or that there has always been a plurality of men in the world and the human race is not descended from one man.
This can be shown as follows. If nobility cannot be brought into existence where it did not previously exist (which, I have said a number of times, is implied in their position, since a base man cannot bring it into existence in himself, nor can a base father do so in his son), then a man remains throughout his life in the condition that he inherits at birth, and the condition he inherits is that of his father. By extension, this continuance in the one condition goes right back to the very first parent; the whole human race must have the same condition as that of the first male parent, Adam, for there is no ground whatever whereby there could be any change between Adam and those who are alive today.
So if Adam was noble, we are all noble; if he was base, we are all base. This is tantamount to denying any distinction between these two conditions, and therefore tantamount to denying the existence of the conditions themselves. This is stated in the words that follow those quoted above: either that we are all noble or all base.
If, however, the distinction is retained, then it necessarily follows that some people are to be termed noble and some base; furthermore, since any change from baseness to nobility is excluded, the human race must be descended from different sources, one noble and the other base. The canzone makes this point at the words: or that mankind did not have one origin. Such a view is completely false according to the Philosopher, according to our faith (which cannot deceive us) and according to the religion and ancient belief of the Gentiles.
Although the Philosopher does not state that we all originate from one man, he does hold that there is a single nature in all men; this cannot have a plurality of sources. Similarly, Plato holds that all men depend for their existence on a single Idea, not on several, which is to attribute to them a single source.
It is clear from Solomon that the view stated above is completely false according to our faith, which must be upheld in its entirety. Where Solomon distinguishes between all men and brute animals, he refers to the former as children of Adam: "Who knows whether the spirits of the children of Adam rise on high, and those of beasts sink below?"
And see how Ovid testifies in his Metamorphoses that this view was false according to the Gentiles, where, talking of the formation of the world from the perspective of pagan (or Gentile) belief, he says: "Man was born"; he does not say "men" but "man", and "was born" either because he who shaped all things made him from a divine seed; or else because the new-formed earth, recently separated from the fine, diaphanous matter of the noble heaven, retained the seeds of its kindred heaven, and Prometheus, son of Iapetus, mixing this earth with water from the river, formed it into the likeness of the gods who rule all things. In this passage he clearly maintains that there was only one first man.
So the canzone says: This alternative I certainly do not accept, namely, that the human race did not begin from one man. It adds: Nor they likewise, if they are Christians. It speaks of "Christians" and not of "philosophers" or "Gentiles" (though their views do not run contrary), since the Christian view has greater force, and shatters every falsification, in virtue of the highest light of heaven that irradiates it.
In the words It is clear, then, to healthy minds that their views are worthless I conclude that their error has been refuted. And I indicate that it is time to direct our gaze to the truth, when I say And now I wish to state what, in my view. My meaning here is that what has been said has clearly shown to healthy minds that their views are worthless, that is, lacking any marrow of truth.
I use the term "healthy" with some care. I should explain that our intellect can be described as healthy or sick. (By "intellect" I mean the noble part of our soul, which can be designated by a single term, "mind".) It can be described as healthy when it is not hindered by any evil of mind or body from pursuing its distinctive activity, which is to have accurate knowledge of things.
As regards the former, I have seen three terrible sicknesses afflicting people's minds. The first is due to boastfulness of character. Many people are so presumptuous that they think they know everything, and therefore declare to be certainly true things that are in fact uncertain. Cicero denounces this vice most strongly in On the Offices, as does Thomas in Against the Gentiles, where he says: "Many people are so presumptuous about their intellectual ability that they think their intellects can serve as the measure of reality, believing that whatever seems true to them is in fact true, and what does not is in fact false."
As a result, they never become truly learned. Regarding themselves as quite adequately learned with their own stock of knowledge, they never ask questions, never listen to anyone; they wish to have their opinion asked by others, but before people have finished asking a question, they give an erroneous reply. Solomon says of them in Proverbs: "Have you encountered someone eager to give a reply? From him you may expect not instruction but nonsense."
The second sickness is due to timidity of character. This fault is so deeply ingrained in many people that they are incapable of believing that they, or anyone else, can know things as they truly are. Consequently, they make no effort themselves to become informed, or to think carefully, and care nothing for what others say. Aristotle makes this criticism of them, that they are incompetent to study moral philosophy. Such people, like beasts, live a life of squalid ignorance, having despaired of learning anything.
The third sickness is due to frivolity of character. Many people have such frivolous imaginations that they leap from one thing to another when they are discussing any subject. They draw a conclusion without going through a process of reasoning, and from that conclusion they jump to another. In their own eyes they seem to be arguing with great subtlety, but in fact they do not ground their thought on any principles, and their imagination fails to lead them to perceive anything as it truly is.
The Philosopher's opinion regarding them is that one should pay them no attention and have no dealings with them: "There is no point in holding an argument with those who deny first principles." Among their number are many ignorant people who do not even know the alphabet, but wish to debate matters of geometry, astronomy and physics.
The mind can also be unhealthy through some bodily evil or defect, either because of a defect in one of the causes at birth, as in the case of the mentally retarded, or because of brain damage, as in the case of those who are deranged. The law refers to this infirmity where it says in the Infortiatum: "In anyone making a will, what is required at the time he makes it is health of mind, not of body."I affirm, then, that to those intellects which are not sick, because of some defect of mind or body, but are free, eager and healthy recipients of the light of the truth, it is clear that the opinion of the common people given above is empty, that is, lacking any value.
The canzone then adds that, for the reasons given, I judge these opinions to be false and worthless, and, therefore, repudiate them. This is said at the words And so I repudiate them as false. I go on to say that it is time to show what the truth is, which in this case means to show what constitutes nobility, and how one can recognize the person who possesses it. I indicate this in the words And now I wish to state what, in my view.
