Now that we have in the preceding part fully treated certain questions that needed settling before we could ascertain how to define the good quality we are discussing, it is time to proceed to the next part.
This begins: Wherever virtue is present, so, too, is nobility. It will help to note that this part has two sections: in the first a point is established that was touched on above but left unproven; in the second we reach a conclusion and finally perceive what the definition is that has been our goal all along. This second section begins: Therefore, as perse derives from black, so every virtue... derives from nobility.
To establish the first point we must recall what was said above, that if nobility includes and extends beyond the characteristics that constitute virtue it is more reasonable to hold that virtue comes from nobility. The hypothesis that nobility does extend beyond virtue is proven in this section, and a comparison is drawn with the heavens to illustrate the point that wherever virtue is present so, too, is nobility.
A principle which is contained in the Law, and is held to be a maxim established by it, should be noted here: any self-evident truth has no need of further proof. There is no truth so evident to us as that nobility is present wherever virtue is present, and that in everyday speech people call noble whatever is virtuous in realizing its nature.
The text says, then, just as wherever a star is present, so, too, is the sky, and adds but not vice versa, that is, the contrary is not true, that wherever the sky is present, so, too, is a star. Similarly, it is the case that wherever virtue is present, so, too, is nobility, but not that wherever nobility is present virtue is present, too.The comparison illustrates the point beautifully and aptly, for nobility is truly a heaven in which a rich variety of stars shines. In it shine the intellectual and moral virtues; in it shine the good dispositions given by nature, namely, piety and religion, and praiseworthy feelings, namely, shame, pity and many others; in it shine the physical excellences, namely, beauty, strength and more or less unbroken good health.
So numerous are the stars spread across the sky that we can scarcely wonder that they cause a rich variety of fruits to grow on human nobility; numerous indeed are nobility's various natures and powers, all concentrated and united in a single substance, on which, as on various branches, it brings forth fruits of different kinds. Indeed I make bold to assert with confidence that human nobility, considered in terms of the many fruits it produces, surpasses angelic nobility, although the latter is more divine in terms of unity.
It was this nobility of ours, with the profusion of its abundant and manifold fruitfulness, that moved the psalmist to compose the psalm beginning: "Lord our God, how wonderful is your name throughout the earth." In this he extols man, as if marvelling at the love God has for this human creature, in the words: "What is man, that you, o God, lavish your love on him? You have made him little less than the angels, crowning him with glory and honour; you have given him charge over all the works of your hands." The comparison drawn between human nobility and the sky was indeed, then, beautiful and apt.
When the text says next Now we know that for women and for those in their youth it offers evidence of what I have been stating, pointing out that nobility embraces aspects of life where there is no question of virtue being present. In the following words, qualifies as belonging to this excellence, it notes that nobility, which is excellence in the highest sense, is present whenever shame (that is, fear of dishonour) is present, in people such as women and young men, in whom shame is good and praiseworthy. This shame is not virtue, but a certain feeling which it is proper to experience.
The text says only Now we know that for women and for those in their youth, since, as the Philosopher states in the Ethics, "shame is not praiseworthy, indeed it is ill becoming, in old men or in serious men", because they ought to avoid anything that might lead them to feel shame.
This is too much to expect of young men and of women, and so for them it is praiseworthy to fear being dishonoured because of some fault. Such a feeling comes from nobility, and in them it can be regarded as nobility and given that name, just as insouciance should be regarded as baseness and lack of nobility. So it is a good, indeed an excellent, sign of nobility in boys and youths who have not attained their maturity that shame should colour their faces after they have committed a fault, for then it is a fruit of true nobility.
