The most helpful way to begin clarifying the meaning of the canzone set out above is to note that it has two parts: the first is an introduction, and the second is the treatise itself. The second part begins with the opening line of the second stanza: One ruler of the empire described nobility as consisting, in his view.
The first part itself consists of three sections: in the first I say why I depart from my usual poetic style; in the second I explain what my subject is; in the third I turn for help to the source which can most fully supply it, namely, truth. The second section begins: Since, then, this seems a time for waiting; and the third: And at the outset I invoke that lord.
In the opening words I say that "I must abandon the sweet poems of love that have been my thoughts' constant quest", and go on to explain why this is so: it is not because I do not intend ever again to write love poetry, but because my lady's attitude to me appeared to have changed in such a way as to give me no occasion for speaking of love.
Note that I do not say that the attitude of the lady really is "disdainful and hard", but only that such is how it appears – just as in the tenth chapter of the preceding book I also speak of appearance being at variance with reality. How it can be that one and the same thing can be sweet and seem bitter, or be clear and seem obscure, is sufficiently explained there.
Next, as I have explained, I announce my theme in the words beginning Since, then, this seems a time for waiting. When I speak of "a time for waiting", I am not talking of a subject that can be just skimmed over, since what is mentioned here is for me a very powerful motive in my present undertaking; rather, it should be made clear how reasonable it is that we should in all our actions wait for the right time, particularly with regard to speech.
Time, as Aristotle says in the Physics, is a "succession of movement involving before and after"; more precisely, it is "succession of movement in the heavens", which according to a varying pattern disposes things here below to receive their forms.
For the earth is differently disposed to receive the forms of plants and flowers at the beginning of spring than it is in winter; and one season is differently disposed to receive seeds than another. The same holds true for the human mind, since its operation depends on a person's bodily constitution, which is differently disposed at different times, in accordance with the circulation of the heavens.
Consequently, words, which can be regarded as the seed of activity, must be employed or set aside with great discrimination, so that on the one hand they may be given a good reception and ultimately bear fruit, and on the other they, on their part, may not suffer from sterility. So one must take care to recognize the proper time as, regards both the one who is speaking and the one who is to be addressed: if the speaker is poorly disposed, his words are as often as not harmful; if the listener is poorly disposed, the speaker's words are badly received, however good they may be in themselves. Hence the saying of Solomon in Ecclesiastes: "There is a time to speak, and a time to keep silent."
That is why, when I found my customary disposition to speak of love changed (for the reason given in the last chapter), it seemed to me that what was called for was to wait upon time, for time eventually brings with it the fulfilment of all desire, and like a benefactor makes a gift of this td all who are prepared to wait.
As St James the Apostle says in his letter: "Look: the farmer awaits the precious fruit of the earth, patiently enduring until the early and late rains fall." Indeed if we carefully investigate what causes all our quarrels, we find that they come in large measure from our not recognizing what is, or is not, the appropriate time for doing things.
What I say, then, is: "Since it seems to me time for waiting, I shall put aside", that is, I shall leave unused, "my accustomed style", that is, the "sweet" mode of speech that I have employed when speaking of Love. I state that my theme is that "worthiness" whose possession makes a person truly noble. "Worthiness" can be used in a variety of senses; here it means a natural capacity, or better, an excellence bestowed by nature, as I shall make clear.
I indicate that I shall treat of this subject in rhyme that is harsh and subtle. It should be explained here that "rhyme" can be understood in two ways, broadly or strictly. In its strict sense, it refers only to the customary harmony between the ultimate and penultimate syllables of different lines; in its broad sense, it refers to the entire genre of discourse which is characterized by regular, rhythmical lines ending in rhymed harmonies. It is the latter sense that is intended in the introduction.
Harsh refers to the sound of what is said, which ought not to be soft when one is treating of a matter of such gravity; subtle refers to the meaning of the words which proceed by arguing and disputing subtly.
I continue: And in so doing refute the false and base opinion; here I promise again that I shall refute the judgment of those who are seriously in error. False means far from the truth; base means originating in, and being reinforced by, baseness of soul.
A point worth noting here is that whereas in this introduction I promise first to give an exposition of what is true, and then to refute what is false, in the treatise itself I reverse the order: I first refute what is false, then give an exposition of the truth – which seems to run counter to what I promised. The reason for this is that although one's aim is to do both, one's principal aim is to expound the truth; one refutes what is false only with a view to making clearer what truth is.
In the introduction, then, I promise first to expound the truth, that being my principal aim; in so doing, I create in the minds of those listening a desire to hear. In the treatise itself, I first refute what is false, so that, once misleading views have been cleared away, the truth may more readily be accepted. This is the procedure adopted by the master of human reasoning, Aristotle, who always first did battle with the adversaries of the truth, and then, having vanquished them, demonstrated the truth.
Finally, when I say And at the outset I invoke that lord, I invoke the aid of truth. He is that lord who dwells in the eyes (literally, in the demonstrations) of Philosophy. He is well deserving of the title "lord", for the soul is a lady when it is his spouse, and a slave without a shred of liberty when it is not.
I go on to say: Drawing her to love her very self, for Philosophy (which is, as the last treatise explained, a loving exercise of wisdom) turns her gaze back on herself when she catches sight of the beauty of her lord's eyes. What this means is that the soul, when philosophizing, not only contemplates the truth itself; she also contemplates her own contemplation and its particular beauty, consciously reflecting on herself and loving herself on account of the beauty of her first gaze. It is on this note that the three-part introduction in the text of the present treatise comes to a close.
