From the similarities just discussed, it may be seen who these movers are whom I address: they are the movers of that heaven, people such as Boethius and Cicero, who, through the sweetness of their writings, set my steps on the path of love, or study, of this lady, most noble Philosophy. This they did through the rays of their star, that is, through the works written about her – it is implied here that in every discipline the works written on it are a star full of light, explaining the content of that discipline.
And after this clarification, the true meaning of the first stanza of the above canzone may be seen from the fictitious and literal exposition. From that same exposition, the second stanza may be sufficiently understood, down to the words: This newcomer makes me look at a woman.
It should be borne in mind here that this woman is Philosophy, who truly is a woman full of sweetness, adorned with goodness, wonderful in wisdom, glorious in liberty, as will be made clear in the third treatise, whose subject will be her nobility.
Where it says If anyone wishes to discover fulfilment, let him gaze into the eyes of this lady, the eyes of this woman are her explanations, which, when directed into the eyes of the intellect, inflame with love any soul that is freed from the limitations of its present condition. O looks most sweet and ineffable, instant captivators of the human mind, who appear in the revealing of Philosophy's eyes when she discourses with her lovers! Truly happiness is in you, such that anyone who looks on you receives bliss, and salvation from the death of ignorance and vice.
Where it says Provided, though, that he is not afraid to endure the anguish of sighing what is meant is: provided that he is not afraid to endure the effort of study and struggling with questions, which spring up and multiply from the moment this lady's looks are first encountered, but which then disappear as her light continues to shine, like small morning clouds before the face of the sun. And once her friend, the intellect remains free and full of certainty, like the air purged and made luminous by the noon rays.
The meaning of the third stanza is likewise apparent from the literal commentary, down to where it says: The soul laments. Here particular attention should be paid to a moral point latent in these words: the discovery of a greater friend must not make one forget the services rendered by a lesser; if one can indeed only follow the one by leaving the other, then one must follow the nobler while abandoning the other with expressions of genuine regret, thereby giving cause to the new friend whom one is following to love one the more.
Where it says: Of my eyes what is meant is simply this: it was indeed a difficult moment when the first explanation given by this woman entered the eyes of my intellect, an explanation which was the immediate cause of this love of mine.
The words all such as me refer to those souls who are free of paltry and base delights and of ill-bred manners, and who are gifted with intelligence and memory. It speaks also of one who kills and of my death; this seems to run counter to what was said above about the fulfilment brought about by this woman.
It should, therefore, be borne in mind that the one who is speaking here is not the same as the one who spoke earlier; the two express opposing points of view, as was explained above. It is, then, scarcely to be wondered at that "yes" was said there while "no" is said here, if one keeps clearly in mind whose strength is declining and whose is mounting.
In the fourth stanza the words a fresh spirit of love refer to a thought which springs from my study. Here it should be explained that in this allegory the word love always refers to this study, which is the devotion of the mind in love to the object of its love.
When this spirit says You will witness the beauty of wonders so profound it proclaims that through the lady will be witnessed the beauty of things that arouse wonder: this is no less than the truth, for the beauty of wonderful things consists in seeing the causes of those things, and these she reveals; this seems to be the Philosopher's view at the beginning of the Metaphysics, where he says that it is through seeing such beauty that men are drawn to love this woman. (The next book will deal, more fully with this word "wonder".)
All that follows after this point in the canzone is sufficiently clear from the earlier commentary. And so I shall end this second book by forthrightly declaring that the lady whom I loved after my first love was the most beautiful and most honourable daughter of the Emperor of the universe, to whom Pythagoras gave the name of Philosophy.
Here the second book ends, which is designed to give an exposition of the canzone set out as the first course.
