The three qualities just described, which must all be present if giving is to manifest whole-hearted liberality, would have been quite lacking in a Latin commentary, and yet are found in the vernacular commentary, as the following makes clear.
A Latin commentary would have lacked the required quality of being of service to many, for, if we recall what was discussed above, educated people who do not speak Italian would not have been able to make use of the service offered. Furthermore, were we to take stock of those of their number who do speak the language, we should find that scarcely one in a thousand would genuinely have been served by the commentary, because they are so given to avarice that they would have paid it no heed: this vice removes every trace of nobility of mind, which is the deepest source of man's desire for this food.
I declare to their shame that they do not deserve to be called educated, since they do not acquire education for its own sake, but only as a means to gain money and status – just as no one deserves to be called a lutanist who keeps a lute in his house to lend it for a fee, and not to use it for making music.
To return to my main theme, I declare that one can clearly see how a Latin commentary would have brought benefit to few people, but the vernacular will be of service to a very large number.
For excellence of mind, which is eager to have this service, is found in those who, through the unfortunate neglect entailed by activities in the world, have left education to men who have turned this lady into a prostitute. These noble people are princes, barons, knights and many others of like nobility, women no less than men, a vast number of both sexes, whose language is not that acquired through education, but the vernacular.
Furthermore, Latin would not have given a useful gift, which the vernacular will do. For nothing is useful except in so far as it is actually used, and its goodness is not merely in a state of potency, which is a less than perfect form of existence – such, for instance, is the case with gold, pearls and other precious things when they are buried underground.
The true gift which this commentary offers is the meaning of the canzoni for whose sake it is composed, which is intended principally to lead men to knowledge and virtue, as will become evident in the course of crossing the sea constituted by my discussion of them.
This meaning can be of use only to those in whom true nobility is sown in the way to be described in the fourth book; almost all such people are to be found among those whose language is the vernacular, as are those people specified earlier in this chapter.
This is not inconsistent with there being the occasional Latin speaker among them, for as my master Aristotle says: "One swallow does not make a summer." It is clear, then, that the vernacular will give something that is useful, whereas Latin would not have done so.
Again, the vernacular will give its gift without being asked, which Latin would not have done. For it will spontaneously offer itself as a commentary, which is something never asked of it by anyone. The same cannot be said of Latin, which has already been asked to serve in the writing of commentaries or glosses on many works, as a glance at the opening words of many of them will reveal.
It is clear, then, that whole‑hearted liberality moved me to choose the vernacular rather than Latin.
