Then, making the figs with both his thumbs,

the thief raised up his fists and cried:

'Take that, God!  It's aimed at you!'

From that time on the serpents were my friends,

for one of them coiled itself around his neck

as if to say, 'Now you shall speak no more,'

while another enmeshed his arms and held him fast,

knotting itself so tight around his front

he could not even twitch his arms.

Ah, Pistoia, Pistoia, why won't you resolve

to burn yourself to ashes, cease to be,

since you exceed your ancestors in evil?

Through all the gloomy rounds of Hell

I saw no soul so prideful against God,

not even him who toppled from the walls at Thebes.

He ran away without another word.

And then I saw a centaur full of rage

come shouting: 'Where, where is that unripe soul?'

Maremma does not have as many snakes,

I think, as he had on his back,

from where the human part begins down to the rump.

On his shoulders, just at the nape of the neck,

crouched a dragon with its wings spread wide

that sets on fire whatever it encounters.

My master said: 'That is Cacus,

who in the cave beneath the Aventine

many times over has made a lake of blood.

'His road is different from his brothers'

because he stole, with wicked cunning,

the herd of cattle he found near at hand.

'For that his wily ways were ended

beneath the club of Hercules, who struck perhaps

a hundred blows, though he felt not the tenth.'

While my master spoke the centaur had run past.

Below where we were standing, three new souls

had neared, although we did not see them

until we heard their shouts: 'You,

who are you?'  At that he stopped his tale

and we gave heed to them alone.

I knew none of them, and yet it happened -- 

as often happens by some chance -- 

that one had cause to speak another's name,

asking: 'What's become of Cianfa?'

And then, to catch my guide's attention,

I held my finger up from chin to nose.

If, reader, you are slow to credit

what I'm about to tell you, it's no wonder:

I saw it, and I myself can scarce believe it.

While I stood staring, with raised brows,

a reptile with six legs propelled itself

at one of them, and fastened itself to him.

It grabbed his belly with its middle claws,

then with its forepaws held his arms

and bit him on both cheeks.

It stretched its hind feet down the other's thighs,

thrusting its tail between them

and curled it up behind, above the buttocks.

Never did clinging ivy fix itself

so tight upon a tree as did that fearful beast

entwine itself around the other's limbs.

Then they fused together, as if made

of molten wax, mixing their colors

so that neither seemed what it had been before,

as over the surface of a scrap of parchment,

before the flame, a brownish color comes

that is not black, yet makes the white die out.

The other two were looking on and each 

was shouting: 'Oh my, Agnello, how you change!

Look, now you are neither two nor one!'

Already the two heads had been united,

two sets of features blending,

both lost in a single face.

Four separate limbs combined to form two arms.

The thighs and calves, the stomach and the chest

turned into members never seen before.

All trace of their first aspect was erased

and the unnatural figure seemed both two

and none; and off it went, at its slow pace.

As the green lizard beneath the scorching lash

of dog-day heat, between one hedge and the next,

seems lightning as it streaks across the road,

just so appeared -- darting toward the bellies

of the other two -- a little fiery reptile,

black and livid as a peppercorn.            

That part where first we are nourished

it transfixed in one of them

and then fell prone before him.

The one transfixed just stared, said nothing.

Indeed, with his feet stock-still, he yawned,

as if deep sleep or fever had assailed him.  

He and the reptile stared at one another.

Both gave out dense smoke, one from its wound,

the other from its mouth.  Then their smoke merged.

Let Lucan now fall silent where he tells

of poor Sabellus and Nasidius,

and let him wait to hear what comes forth now!

Let Ovid not speak of Cadmus or Arethusa,

for if his poem turns him into a serpent

and her into a fountain, I grudge it not,

for never did he change two natures, face to face,

in such a way that both their forms

were quite so quick exchanging substance.

Their corresponding changes went like this:

the reptile split its tail into a fork

and he that was wounded drew his feet together.

First his calves and then his thighs began

to knit so that in but a moment

no sign of a division could be seen.

The cloven tail assumed the shapes

the other one was losing, and his skin

was turning soft while the other's hardened.

I saw the man's arms shrinking toward the armpits

and the brute's forepaws, which had been short,

lengthen, precisely as the other's dwindled.

Then the hind-paws, twisting together,

became the member that a man conceals,

and from his own the wretch had grown two paws.

While the smoke veils one and now the other

with new color and grows hair here

and elsewhere strips it off,

one of them rose to his feet, the other fell,

but neither turned aside his baleful glare

under which each muzzle changed its shape.

In the one erect it shrank in to the temples,

and, from the excess flesh absorbed,

two ears extruded from smooth cheeks.

Whatever did not recede, left over

from that excess, made a nose for the face

and gave the lips a proper thickness.

The one prone on the ground shoves out his snout

and draws his ears into his head

as a snail draws in its horns,

and his tongue, till now a single thing

and fit for speech, divides, and the other's

forked tongue joins, and the smoke stops.

The soul just now become a brute takes flight,

hissing through the hollow, and the other,

by way of speaking, spits after him.

Then he turned his new-made shoulders and he said

to the third: 'I want Buoso to run, as I have done,

down on all fours along this road.'

Thus I saw the seventh rabble change

and change again, and let the newness of it

be my excuse if my pen has gone astray.

And though my eyes were dazed

and my mind somewhat bewildered,

these sinners could not flee so stealthily

but I with ease discerned that Puccio Lameshanks,

and he alone, of the three companions

in that group, remained unchanged.

The other was the one, Gaville, you lament.

