When I say that it is in my mind that the activity of love takes place, I am not making a pointless remark; I have a reason for saying this, namely, to indicate the nature of this love by stating the locus of its activity.
It should be explained here that, as was said above, for the reason given there, every being has a love specific to it. Just as simple bodies have an inborn love for the place proper to them – so that earth always descends to the centre, while fire has an inborn love for the circumference above us bordering the heaven of the Moon, and therefore always rises upwards towards that –
so primary compound bodies, such as minerals, have a love for the place suited to their generation; in that place they grow, and from it they derive their vigour and power. That is why, as we observe, the magnet always receives power from the quarter in which it was generated.
Plants, which are the primary form of animate life, even more clearly have a love for certain places, in accordance with what their constitution requires; and so we see that some plants sing, as it were, when alongside water, others when on the ridges of mountains, others when on slopes and on foothills; if they are transplanted, they either die completely or live a sad life, as it were, like beings separated from their friends.
Brute animals not only more clearly still have a love for particular places, but, as we observe, they also love one another.Human beings have their specific love, for what is perfect and just. And since the human being, despite the fact that his whole form constitutes a single substance in virtue of its nobility, has a nature that embraces all these features, he can have all these loves, and indeed does have them.
For through the nature of a simple body, which characterises the matter which receives the human form, he naturally loves to go downwards; consequently, for him to move bodily upwards requires more effort. Through the second nature, that of a complex body, he loves both the place of his generation and the time when this took place; and so no one has greater bodily strength than in the place where he was generated and at the time of his generation.
That is why we read in the stories about Hercules that, when he was fighting with the giant Anteus, every time that the giant grew weary and stretched his body on the ground, either of his own will or when forced down by Hercules, strength and energy flowed up into him deriving entirely from the earth on which and from which he had been generated.
When Hercules perceived this, he finally took hold of Anteus, clasped him to himself, lifted him off the ground and then kept him from touching it for so long that he overcame him through superior strength, and slew him.
Through the third or plant nature, man has a love for certain food, not on account of its sense qualities but on account of the nourishment it gives; food of this kind enables this nature to carry out its functions quite perfectly, while other food does so only imperfectly. And so we observe that certain foods make men well-formed, strong-limbed and of a very healthy complexion, while others do the opposite.
Through the fourth nature, the animal or sense nature, man has a further love by which he loves in accordance with sense perception, like the other animals; this love in man has most need of control because of its overwhelming force, particularly with regard to the delight afforded by taste and touch. Through the fifth and final nature – the nature which is truly human, or, to use a better word, angelic, that is, rational – man has a love for truth and virtue; and from this love is born true and perfect friendship, based on goodness, of which the Philosopher speaks in the eighth book of the Ethics, where he treats of friendship.
Since, therefore, this nature is called mind, as was explained above, I spoke of Love as discoursing in my mind to indicate that the love in question was that which is born in this most noble nature, that is, the love of truth and virtue, and to exclude any false opinion regarding myself, by which it might have been suspected that my love was for some sensual delight. I then use the word yearningly to indicate the steadiness and fervour of this love.
I say: "It often intimates things which make my intellect bewildered." This is justly said, for in discoursing about the lady my thoughts often wished to attain definite knowledge of aspects of her, but I could not grasp these, and became so bewildered that I gave the appearance of one who had lost possession of his faculties. My situation was like that of someone who trains his eye along a straight line: first, he sees things nearest to him clearly; then, looking further on, he sees things less clearly; then, looking even further ahead, he is unsure; then, looking towards what lies at the greatest distance, he sees nothing, because his sight fails to reach so far.
This is the first source of the ineffability of the subject I have taken, as my theme. I go on to indicate the second when I say, Love's words. I say that my thoughts (which are Love's words) "sound so sweetly" that my soul, that is, my affection, yearns to be able to put them into words; and because such speech is beyond me I say that the soul is thereby moved to lament, at the words: Mine is a sad plight! for I am unable.
This is the other source of ineffability, namely, our lacking words to express all that is seen by the intellect. Where I say, My soul which listens and hears them, "listening" refers to the words, and "hearing" to the sweetness of the sound.
