Now that I have discussed the first section of this part which is concerned with showing how we may recognize the noble person in the outward signs that his nature manifests, it is time to go on to the second, beginning In maturity it is temperate and strong.
The text indicates here that just as in adolescence the noble nature displays itself in a person's being obedient, gentle and bashful, and endowed with physical beauty, so in maturity it makes a person temperate, strong, loving, courteous and loyal. These five qualities appear to be, and indeed are, necessary for our perfection when this is considered specifically in relation to ourselves.
It should be explained here that all that the noble nature prepares in the first stage of life is bestowed and directed by the provident working of universal Nature, which directs the individual towards his perfection. This perfection of ours can be considered from two different points of view. It can be considered in relation to our own selves; as such it must be possessed in maturity, which is when our life reaches full development.
It can also be considered in relation to others, and since a person must himself be perfect before he can communicate his perfection to others, he is required to possess perfection in this second sense only after he has passed through the stage we are discussing, that is, when he has reached old age, as I shall explain below.
Here I must call to mind what I said above when I discussed the desire that springs up in us at the beginning of our life. The operation of this desire always consists in either pursuing or fleeing something; and whenever it pursues what it ought and as far as it ought, and flees what it ought and as far as it ought, man keeps within the bounds set for his perfection.
This desire must, however, have reason in the saddle, for just as a horse, no matter how noble its nature, when it is without bridle and is left to itself without the guidance of an expert rider, does not acquit itself as it should, so this desire (called irascible or appetitive), no matter how noble its nature, needs to obey reason, which directs it with bridle and spurs, like any expert horseman.
Reason makes use of the bridle when the desire is pursuing something; this bridle is called temperance, and its role is to make clear exactly how far pursuit should go. It makes use of the spurs when the desire is fleeing something, to swing the desire round at a point where it still wishes to continue its flight; this spur is called fortitude or strength of spirit, and the role of this virtue is to make clear just where the desire ought to stop and engage its adversary.
Virgil, our greatest poet, describes Aeneas as acting in such an unbridled way in the part of the Aeneid where this stage of life is symbolically portrayed, comprising books four through six. How Aeneas bridled himself when, after having received so much pleasure from Dido, and when experiencing so much delight with her, he tore himself away in order to follow an honourable, praiseworthy and beneficial course!
What a spurring onward occurred when the same Aeneas had the courage to go alone with the Sybil down into hell in quest of the soul of his father Anchises, exposing himself to so many dangers! It is clear, then, that in our maturity being perfect necessarily involves being "temperate and strong". A good nature produces and displays these qualities, as the text expressly says.
Moreover, being loving is a necessary part of perfection in this stage, since during maturity one must look behind and ahead, like something at the meridian of its circle. One must love one's elders, from whom one has received life and nourishment and instruction, and so show one's gratitude. One must love those who are younger, so that one may, through loving them, bring benefit to them from what one possesses, and may oneself in turn be provided for and honoured in less prosperous days.
In the fifth book of the same work the above-mentioned poet shows that Aeneas did not lack this love: he left the aged Trojans behind in Sicily in the care of Acestes, sparing them further labours; and in the same place he instructed his son Ascanius and the other adolescents in the handling of arms. It is clear, then, that love is necessary in this stage, as the text says.
Furthermore, it is necessary in this stage to be courteous, for although it is a fine thing to be a person of courteous behaviour at any stage, it is especially necessary here. This is so because, on the one hand, any adolescent who is wanting in courtesy deserves to be forgiven readily because of his lack of years; on the other, someone in old age cannot act in this way, since the dignity and seriousness required of him preclude it; a fortiori is this the case with someone in extreme old age.
This supreme poet makes it clear that Aeneas possessed such courtesy: to honour the corpse of Misenus, who had been Hectors trumpeter and had then commended himself to Aeneas' care, the king dressed himself for the task and took up an axe to help hew the wood for the fire in which the corpse had to be burned in accordance with their custom. It is quite evident, then, that courtesy is necessary in maturity; so the noble soul clearly displays this quality in this stage, as the text indicates.
Moreover, it is necessary to be loyal in this stage. Loyalty consists in accepting and putting into practice what the laws lay down. It is a quality that particularly becomes a person in maturity, for on the one hand the adolescent, as has been said, deserves to be forgiven readily because of his lack of years; on the other, the old person through his greater experience of life must himself be just, and not simply accept what the law says, except in the sense that what he judges to be right is in fact identical with the law; like someone who is in fact free of any law, he must be his own guide in acting justly – something beyond the powers of one in the previous stage of life. It is sufficient for the latter that he carry out the law, and take pleasure in so doing, as did Aeneas in his conduct of the games in Sicily which were held to mark the anniversary of his father's death. The rewards he promised for victory he loyally gave to each victorious contestant, in accordance with their long-established custom, which for them had the force of law.
It is clear, then, that in this stage loyalty, courtesy, love, fortitude and temperance are necessary, as the text discussed here says, and so the noble soul displays them all without fail.
