The true root and foundation of the honour due to the emperor is the need men have to exist in society, which is directed to one end, a life of happiness. No individual is capable of attaining this by himself, without the help of others, since everyone has many needs that he cannot satisfy on his own. Hence the Philosopher's dictum that man is by nature a social animal.
And just as the individual for his fulfilment requires the domestic society of a family, so the household requires for its fulfilment to be part of a neighbourhood: it would otherwise be lacking in many ways, and thus be precluded from attaining happiness. Again, a single neighbourhood cannot satisfy all its own needs; for this the city is required. For the sake of trade and defence, the city in its turn needs to cooperate with, and have friendly relations with, surrounding cities; and so the kingdom was born.
Since the human psyche cannot be content with possessing a limited amount of land, but, as experience tells us, always desires the glory of making further acquisitions, quarrels and wars inevitably spring up between the various kingdoms. These are the scourge of cities, and through cities of neighbourhoods, and through neighbourhoods of households, and through households of the individual. The result is that it is impossible to attain happiness.
To eradicate these wars and their causes, it is, then, absolutely necessary that the entire world, and all that the human race is capable of possessing be a monarchy, that is, that it be under the dominion of one rule and one ruler: the ruler would himself possess everything and have nothing further to desire, and so he would ensure that kings be content to remain within the bounds of their kingdoms, and thereby keep peace among them. As a result, cities would be at peace, neighbourhoods in this peace would live in friendship, and households through this friendship would obtain all that they need, so that, finally, the individual would live happily, which is the end for which he is born.
Confirmation of this line of reasoning can be found in what the Philosopher says in the Politics: in a plurality directed to one end, one member must direct and rule, and all the others must be ruled and directed. A ship is a good example: on it the various tasks and ends pursued by the sailors are directed to a single end, that of reaching their destined port after enjoying a prosperous voyage. Here we see that just as each officer directs his particular activity to its particular end, so there is one person whose concern is all the particular ends, and who directs them to their single final end: he is the captain and all must obey his commands.
The same obtains in religious communities, in armies, and in all spheres where, as I have said, there is one end in view. It is clear, then, that for the community constituted by the entire human race to attain fulfilment, there must be someone analogous to a captain: one person whose office it would be to have command of all by universal and unquestionable right, directing all the other officers that he deemed to be required by the various situations in the world.
And this, the supreme office, is called rule or empire without qualification, since the function of this office is to govern all other offices of government. Similarly, whoever is appointed to this office is called emperor, since he governs all others who govern; his word is law for all, and must be obeyed by all, and all other government must draw its force and authority from his. It is clear, then, that the honour and authority that belong to the emperor are unsurpassed in human society.
No doubt someone could cavil and say: "Granted that the office of emperor is required for the world's good, it still does not follow that you have succeeded in your principal aim, which is to show that the Roman ruler's claim to supreme authority is based on reason. For the power of Rome was acquired not by virtue of reason, not by a decree of some gathering representing all mankind, but by force, which seems the antithesis of reason." The response to this is obvious.
The choice of this supreme official must have originated primarily in the decision of the one who has concern for all people, namely, God; otherwise the choice would not have been made impartially for all, since there was no human being before the official under discussion whose concern was the good of all.
Furthermore, since, as we can learn from experience, there never has been, nor will there ever be, a race whose nature it is to rule more gently, uphold more firmly or obtain possession more skilfully than the Italians, and particularly that holy people whose blood is mingled with the noble blood of Troy, namely, the Romans, God chose this people for that office.
This was the people best suited to that office, since it could not be obtained without the greatest strength of character, nor exercised without the greatest and most humane benevolence. This office, then, was obtained by the Roman people not principally by means of force, but by divine providence, which is the ultimate ground of all reason. Such is Virgil's view in the Aeneid, when he portrays God as declaring: "To their rule [the Romans'] I set no limit, whether of place or time; to them have I given empire without end."
Force was not, then, the moving cause (as held by the one who cavilled), but the instrumental cause – just as the blows of the hammer are a cause of the knife, but the mind of the smith is the efficient or moving cause. So, too, reason, not force, and indeed divine reason, must be regarded as the source of Roman rule or empire.
This can be shown by two very clear arguments, which make it plain that both the origin and the growth of the imperial city resulted from God's special care.
But since I cannot deal with this theme without making the present chapter too long, and long chapters militate against good retention, I shall extend the digression into another chapter to establish clearly the arguments just mentioned, to the benefit and great pleasure of the reader.
