Now that discussion of the first part has made its meaning evident, it is time to go on to the second. This will be more readily understood if it is recognized that it falls into three sections, corresponding to the three stanzas of which it is comprised: in the first section I commend this lady as a whole and without distinction, in both soul and body; in the second I particularize by praising specifically her soul, and in the third by praising specifically her body.
The first section begins: The sun in circling the entire world does not see; the second begins: The divine power descends into her, and the third: Things appear in her countenance. These sections are to be discussed in turn.
The poem says, then: The sun in circling the entire world does not see. To convey the full meaning of these words I must explain how the world is circled by the sun. To begin with, I do not mean here by "the world" the whole body of the universe, but only this part of it, consisting of the sea and the land. In this I am following the vernacular use of the word which commonly has this meaning, as when someone says, "that man has seen the entire world", referring to the part consisting of the sea and the land.
Pythagoras and his followers held that this world was one of the stars, and that another, identical star (which he called Antichthon) lay opposite it; he said that both were in a single sphere which turned from west to east, and that it was on account of the revolution of this sphere that the sun circled round us, and was successively visible and not visible.
He said, further, that in the centre between the two bodies there existed fire, since he maintained that fire was a nobler body than water or earth, and that the centre was the noblest of the places proper to the four simple bodies; he maintained, consequently, that when fire appeared to move upwards it was in fact moving downwards, towards the centre.
Later Plato held a different opinion: he wrote in one of his works, called Timaeus, that the land and sea were indeed the centre of the entire universe, but that their entire globe revolves around its centre, following the prime movement of the heavens, though at a very slow pace, on account of its dense matter and of its being at the furthest remove from that movement.
These opinions are exposed as false in On the Heavens and the Earth by that glorious philosopher to whom nature most fully disclosed its secrets; he proves there, too, that this world, that is, the earth, stands absolutely fixed and immobile for all eternity. However, it is not my intention to set out here the arguments which Aristotle gives to overturn those views and affirm the truth, because it is more than enough for the people whom I am addressing to know on his great authority that this earth is fixed and does not revolve, and that, with the sea, it is the centre of the heavens.
These heavens revolve unceasingly around this centre, as we ourselves observe; in this revolution there must necessarily be two fixed poles, and a circle equidistant from them which revolves with the greatest speed. Of these two poles, one, this northern pole, is observable to almost all the uncovered earth; the other, southern, pole is hidden to almost all the uncovered earth. The circle which is understood to be midway between these poles is that part of the heavens under which the sun revolves when it is in the constellations of the Ram and the Scales.
It should be explained here that if a stone could fall from this northern pole it would fall out there into the ocean precisely at that point on the ridge of the sea where, were anyone present, the star would be straight above his head. I believe that the distance from Rome to that spot, going due north, is about 2,600 miles, more or less.
To make this clearer, let us imagine a city, with the name Mary, existing on the spot about which I am talking. It would then follow that if a stone were to fall from the other, southern pole, it would fall into the ridge of the Ocean directly opposite Mary on the globe. I believe that from Rome to the spot where this second stone would fall the distance, going due south, is 7,500 miles, more or less.
Let us imagine another city there, with the name Lucy. The distance between these two, no matter from which of them one begins measuring, is 10,200 miles, half the entire globe, so that the citizens of Mary have the soles of their feet opposite those of the citizens of Lucy.
Let us also imagine a circle on this globe which at its every point is equidistant from Mary and Lucy. I believe that this circle would divide the land not covered by the Ocean, down there in the south, along almost the whole of the boundary of the first climatic zone, where, among other peoples, there live the Garamantes, to whom Cato came with people from Rome when they were fleeing from Caesar's rule.
With these three places marked on this globe, it may readily be grasped how the sun circles round it. I declare, then, that the heaven of the Sun revolves from west to east tracing a path not directly contrary to that followed by the daily movement (that is, the movement of day and night), but obliquely contrary to it, so that its equator (where the body of the sun is located), lying equidistant from its poles, intersects the circle between the first two poles at two opposite points, that is, at the beginning of the Ram and at the beginning of the Scales, and diverges from this circle along two arcs, one curving to the north and the other to the south.
The midpoints of these arcs both lie at an angle of 23½ degrees to the first circle in each direction. One of the midpoints is the beginning of the Crab, and the other the beginning of the Goat. It must be the case, then, that at the beginning of the Ram, when the sun passes beneath the equator between the first poles, Mary will see the sun revolving below the rim of the land or the sea, like a millstone of which no more than half is visible; and it will see the sun rising one level higher at a time, as in the thread of a screw, until it completes a little over 91 revolutions.
At the completion of these revolutions, it rises above Mary to almost exactly the same height as it does for us who live at the middle of the earth when the day is equal in length to half the night. (And if anyone were to be standing at Mary with his face always turned to the sun, it would be seen moving towards his right.)
Then it is seen to descend in the same way, again for a little over 91 revolutions, until it circles around below the rim of the earth, or of the sea, being only partly visible. Thereafter it is hidden, and Lucy begins to see it.
Lucy then sees it rising and descending around it for as many revolutions as Mary saw. (And if anyone were standing at Lucy with his face always turned towards the sun, he would see it moving towards his left.) From this it may be seen that these places have one day each year lasting for six months, and a night of the same length, and that when it is day in one of them it is night in the other.
It must also be the case that the circle where the Garamantes live on this globe sees the sun revolving directly above it, when it is travelling under the Ram, not like a millstone but like a wheel, only half of which is ever seen. Then the circle sees the sun moving away from it in the direction of Mary for a little over 91 days, and returning to it for the same length of time; then, when it has returned, it travels under the Scales, and likewise moves away and goes towards Lucy for a little over 91 days, returning in the same length of time.
This region, which extends around the entire globe, always has day and night of equal length, no matter on which side of it the sun is moving; each year it has two summers of very intense heat, and two short winters.
It must further be the case that the two spaces between the imaginary cities and the equator see the sun for different lengths of time, in accordance with how far from, or near to, those places they are; in view of what has been said, exactly how this occurs may now be worked out by anyone of high intelligence, for whom it is fitting to leave a little to personal effort.
From this it may now be seen that the world is so ordered by divine providence that each time the sphere of the sun goes through a complete revolution every part of the globe on which we live receives the same amount of light and darkness.
O ineffable wisdom who created such order, how poorly equipped is our mind to understand you fully! And you, for whose benefit and delight I am writing, in what blindness you live, not raising your eyes to such things, but keeping them fixed in the mire of your own stupidity!
