Now that I have explained how my native language possesses those two properties that have made me its friend, closeness to me and its own proper goodness, I shall explain how that friendship has been confirmed and deepened through the conferring of benefits, harmony in seeking a common goal, and the goodwill that goes with long companionship.
First, then, I on my side have received the most wonderful benefits as a gift from it. It should be explained here that of all benefits that can be conferred none is greater than that which is most precious to the recipient. Nothing is more precious than that for the sake of which all other things are desired; and all other things are desired for the sake of the perfection of the person desiring them.
Granted, then, that man has two perfections, the first conferring being and the second well-being, I shall have received the greatest benefit from my own language if it has been the cause of both for me. It can readily be shown that it has been for me the cause both of being and of well-being, requiring of me only that I refrain from placing any obstacle in its way.
It is quite possible, in the Philosopher's view, for something to have several efficient causes, although only one of these is the efficient cause in the fullest sense; so, for instance, the fire and the hammer are efficient causes of the knife, although only the smith is such in the fullest sense. This vernacular of mine, being the language in which my parents spoke, brought them together, functioning like the fire which prepares the iron for the smith to make a knife. It is clear, then, that it helped to bring about my birth, and was, therefore, to an extent the source of my being.
Moreover, this vernacular of mine set me on the road to knowledge, the highest perfection, in that with its help I made my first beginnings in Latin and with its help that language became clear to me; Latin was then the means whereby I was able to go forward on my own. And so it is evident, and something I gladly acknowledge, that my vernacular has been a wonderful benefactor to me.
Furthermore, we have together sought the same goal, as the following makes clear. Every being naturally seeks to preserve its own existence; if, then, the vernacular were itself able to seek a goal, this is what it would seek; this would in practice consist of equipping itself with greater stability, and this it could attain only by binding itself together through rhythm and rhyme.
It is this very goal for which I have striven, something so obvious as to need no proof. Both of us have, then, sought the same goal, and through this harmony the friendship has been strengthened and deepened.
The goodwill that goes with companionship has also been present, for from my earliest days I have had goodwill towards it, and have been its familiar companion, using it as I reflected, interpreted and questioned.
So if friendship deepens through companionship, as common experience shows that it does, then clearly this has been supremely true of me, who have made this language my constant preoccupation.
It is evident, then, that my friendship for the vernacular has been formed by all the causes of friendship working together, those that generate it and those that deepen it. It follows that it is not simply love but quite perfect love that I owe it, and do indeed give to it.
So if one casts one's eye back over what has been said, and gathers together all the points made, it is clear that this bread, which must be eaten together with the following canzoni, is satisfactorily purged of its blemishes and of any blame attaching to its being made of barley. It is, then, time to set about serving the various courses. This commentary will be that fine barley bread on which thousands will amply satisfy their hunger, while for me there will be basketsfull left over to enjoy. This will be a new light, a new sun which will rise to take the place of the old sun which is setting, and give light to those now lost in darkness because for them the old sun sheds no light.
