If I am to show that as regards refuting or confirming the opinion of the emperor on the subject under discussion I do not owe submission, I must recall what was said above about the office of the emperor. The imperial authority was established in order to ensure that human beings attain fulfilment in life; it rightly regulates and oversees all our activities, for the area covered by the term "our activities" is precisely coextensive with the area over which the imperial majesty has jurisdiction, whose extension reaches only to the boundaries of that area.
And just as every other human art and function is confined within definite boundaries by the imperial office, so the imperial office itself is limited within a boundary set by God. This should cause no surprise, since we observe that the function and art of nature in all its operations is limited. For if we take the case of nature in its most universal sense, we find that its jurisdiction is coextensive with the entire universe (the heavens and the earth together), and this has a definite boundary, as is proved in the Physics and in On the Heavens and the Earth.
The jurisdiction of universal nature, then, is confined within a definite boundary (and so, consequently, is that of any particular part of nature); and here again He sets the limits who is Himself limited by nothing, He who is the primal goodness, namely, God, who alone in virtue of His infinite capacity encompasses infinity.
What precisely are the boundaries of our activities? Properly speaking, only those activities are ours whose existence is dependent on our intellect and will. So although, for instance, digestive activity takes place in us, it is not a human activity but a natural one.
We must bear in mind here that our intellect has as its object four kinds of activity, each of which it necessarily studies in a different way. There are activities which the intellect does no more than study; it does not and cannot bring any of these activities into being. This is the case with regard to what pertains to physics, metaphysics and mathematics. There are activities which the intellect studies and brings into being in the acts proper to itself, those covered by the term intellectual activities, such as the skilful forms of rational discourse. There are activities which the intellect studies and brings into being in material things outside itself, as in the case of mechanical skills.
Although it is true that the act of studying all these activities is dependent for its existence on our will, the actual existence of these activities is not dependent on our will, for although we might wish that heavy things would naturally move upwards, although we might wish that a syllogism containing false premises would correctly demonstrate a true conclusion, although we might wish that a building would rest as securely on its base when lying at an angle as when standing upright, none of these could actually be the case. For it is not we who are their makers in the strict sense; what we do is discover them.
They were decreed by another; they were made by a greater maker than we. There are, however, other activities which the intellect studies that do result from an act of the will, as, for instance, harming or helping people, standing firm or fleeing in battle, remaining chaste or indulging lust; all of these are entirely dependent for their existence on our will. We are, therefore, judged to be good or bad on their account, for they are entirely ours in the strict sense, for what can be realized by our will is exactly coextensive with what is covered by the term "our activities".
Since in all these voluntary activities there is a certain equity to be observed and an inequity to be avoided, and we may fail to uphold this equity for two reasons, either because we do not know what it is, or because we do not want to carry it out, written law was invented to make clear what equity is, and to command that it be kept. As Augustine says: "If people knew what constituted equity, and carried out what they knew, there would be no need of written law." The Old Digest begins on a similar note: "Written law describes how to put into practice goodness and equity."
The appointed role for the official of whom we have been speaking, the emperor, is to put into writing and make clear what constitutes equity, and to command its observance; we are subject to him in precisely those matters which fall within the compass of our activities in the strict sense described above, and not in any way beyond that.
Here a principle applies that holds in every art and in every calling: the artisans and the apprentices are by right subject to whoever is leader and master in matters pertaining to those callings and arts; outside that realm, they cease to be subject, since the leadership itself ceases to obtain. So one may describe the emperor in figurative language as the rider of the human will. How this horse careers about the field when it is without a rider is only too clear, especially in unhappy Italy, which is left without any government charged with its care.
It must be observed that the more fully any matter pertains to an art or its master, the greater is the subjection that is due, for the more fully a cause operates the greater is the effect. It should be explained here that certain matters are arts to such a degree that nature functions merely as a means used by the art. Take the case of rowing with an oar: there the art uses propulsion, a natural movement, as a means; or of forging iron, where the art uses heat, a natural quality, as a means. In such cases the obligation to be subject to the leader or master is greatest.
There are matters in which the art functions merely as a means used by nature. These are arts in a lesser sense, and in them the artisans are less subject to their leader. Instances of this are the sowing of seed in the ground (where the principal factor is the will of nature), and setting sail from port (where the principal factor is the kind of weather nature decrees). So in these matters we often see disputes arising among the artisans, and the superior asking advice of the inferior.
There are other matters which do not in fact belong to a particular art, yet appear at first sight to pertain to it; when this situation occurs, many people fall into error. In such cases the apprentices are not subject to the master, and do not have any obligation to follow him, as they do when the art in question truly is involved. For instance, fishing appears at first sight to pertain to navigation, and knowing the qualities of herbs appears at first sight to pertain to agriculture. But in neither case are the two governed by the same rules, since fishing comes within the purview of the art of hunting and is subject to its laws, and knowing the qualities of herbs comes within the purview of medicine or of some even more noble branch of learning.
The points made above with reference to the other arts hold good also with regard to the art of ruling as emperor. In this case, too, there are regulations which are arts to a high degree; such is the case with laws governing marriages, slavery, military service and the inheritance of titles. In all these we are, without the slightest doubt, subject to the emperor.
There are other laws which are almost totally dictated by nature, such as that establishing the age at which a man is able to hold office, and in respect of these we are not entirely subject. Now defining things appears at first sight to pertain to the art of ruling as emperor, but it is, and always was, a mistake to believe that the opinion of the emperor carries authority in matters of this kind, such as defining what constitutes youth or nobility. In regard to such matters no judgment of the emperor is to be accepted on the basis of its being the emperor's – so render to God what belongs to God.
Thus, for instance, we ought not to follow or agree with the emperor Nero who said that maturity consisted in beauty and strength of body, but with anyone who says that maturity is the climax of natural life, which is what a philosopher would hold. It is clear, then, that defining nobility does not belong to the art of ruling as emperor. Granted this, we are not subject to him when we are discussing nobility, and if we are not subject to him, then we are not bound to show him respect in this matter. To establish this last point has been the aim of my discussion.
We are, then, finally in a position where we may, with complete freedom and with absolute confidence of mind, run our sword through the opinions commonly held, and cast them to the ground, so that through my victory over them the true opinion may hold sway in the minds of those for whom it makes the light of truth shine powerfully.
