Now that these two preliminary points have been settled, it is time to go on to clarify the meaning of the text. The part with which we are concerned begins: I affirm that every virtue stems ultimately from a single root, understanding here by "virtue" that which makes a man happy in his activity. I add: This is, as the Ethics states, a habit of choice, and go on to give a full definition of moral virtue, modelling my account on how the Philosopher defines it in the Ethics.
This presents two main ideas: first, that every virtue stems from a single source; second, that every virtue here refers to the moral virtues, the present subject of discussion, as the words Ethics states indicate. It should be explained here that the moral virtues are the fruits which are in the fullest sense ours, since producing them is something that lies totally within our power.
Different philosophers have distinguished and classified these in a variety of ways. However, since it seems to me that on any topic on which Aristotle has voiced his divine judgment that of all others should be set aside, I shall deal with the question of what the moral virtues are by giving a brief account of them based on his view.
The following are the eleven virtues referred to as moral by the Philosopher just spoken of. The first is called fortitude: this is a spur and a rein regulating our boldness and our fearfulness with regard to things that threaten our life. The second is temperance: this acts as a guide and rein for our gluttony and our excessive abstinence with respect to things that preserve our life. The third is liberality: this regulates our giving and receiving material things.
The fourth is munificence: this regulates spending on a large scale, moving us to act in this way and keeping us within appropriate limits when we do. The fifth is greatness of soul: this moderates our desire for great honours and renown, and moves us to acquire them. The sixth is proper pride: this moderates our desire for honours of this world, and gives us due respect for them. The seventh is evenness of temper: this moderates our anger and our excessive patience in the face of external troubles.
The eighth is affability: this leads us to relate agreeably to other people. The ninth is called truthfulness: this regulates our speech, so that we claim to be neither more nor less than we actually are. The tenth is called enjoyment: this regulates us in our recreation, enabling us to indulge in this in proper measure. The eleventh is justice, which moves us to love rectitude and to realize it in all areas of life.
Each of these virtues is flanked by two enemies, that is, two vices, one on the side of excess and the other on the side of defect; all these virtues constitute the various means lying between these vices, and all originate from a single source, namely, from the habit of right choice. Speaking generically, then, one can describe all of them as being a habit of choice that keeps to the mean.
It is these, or more precisely the exercise of these, that makes the human being blessed or happy, as the Philosopher indicates in the Ethics, when he defines happiness in the following way: "Happiness is living a perfect life through acting in accordance with virtue." (I grant that many hold prudence, or good judgment, to be a moral virtue, but Aristotle classifies it as an intellectual virtue – though this is not to deny that it functions as the guide of the moral virtues, and shows how they are combined with each other; indeed, they cannot exist if it is lacking.)
It must be clearly explained here that in this life we may enjoy two forms of happiness, distinguished according to two paths that lead to them, one good, the other best: they are the active life and the contemplative life respectively. For although the happiness to which we attain through the active life is certainly good (as has been said), the contemplative life brings us to supreme happiness or blessedness, as the Philosopher demonstrates in the Ethics.
Christ himself, as the Gospel of Luke records, affirms the same thing. There his exchange with Martha is recounted, in which he replies to her: "Martha, Martha, you are anxious and disturbed over many things, but in fact only one is necessary," namely, what you are doing at this very moment. He adds: "Mary has chosen the best part, and it shall not be taken from her." As the passage preceding these words makes clear, Mary was sitting at the feet of Christ, showing no concern for domestic duties, completely absorbed in listening to the Saviour.
The moral interpretation of this incident is that our Lord here wished to show that the highest form of life is the contemplative, however good the active life may be. So much is clear to anyone who studies the words of the gospel with care. However, granted this, the objection could be put to me: since the happiness found in the contemplative life is more excellent than that found in the active life, and both may be, and are, the fruit and end of nobility, why do you not proceed by way of first discussing the intellectual virtues before the moral virtues?
To this I may reply briefly that in teaching any subject one must take into account the ability of the student, and lead him forward by whatever way he finds easier. Therefore, since the moral virtues seem to be, and indeed are, more commonly encountered, more readily understood and more urgently required than the intellectual (not to mention their being more easily affected in mere appearance), it was expedient and appropriate to proceed by taking this path rather than the other, just as, for instance, it would be misguided to try to impart a knowledge of bees by explaining how they produce wax rather than how they produce honey, despite the fact that these have equal claim to being the bees' produce.
