Now that we have made clear how greatly the imperial authority and the philosophical authority are to be respected, both of which seem to lend support to the opinions given above, it is time to pick up the thread of the main argument.
The last opinion mentioned, that of the general populace, has become so entrenched that people, without further ado, without looking for any justification, call everyone who is the son or grandson of some truly worthy person "noble", even if he is a good-for-nothing. This is what is meant by the lines: So entrenched has this quite false opinion become in our society that people call any man noble who can say: "I am the grandson, or son, of such-and-such a worthy person", even if he himself is a good-for-nothing.
It should be noted here how dangerously negligent it is to let a false opinion gain a footing. Just as in a field that is not tilled grass spreads and grows tall and covers the ears of corn, so that from a distance the wheat is lost to view, and in the end the crop is destroyed, so in the mind a false opinion that is not challenged and corrected grows and spreads, so that the ears of reason (that is, the true opinion) are hidden, and effectively buried and destroyed.
What a task I set myself in this canzone! Nothing less than to try, at this late date, to weed a field as overgrown as that of common opinion, which has been left untended for so long. I do not intend, I may say, to clear the whole of this field, but only those parts where the ears of reason have not been completely smothered. What I do intend to do is to set to right those whose natural excellence has kept alive some glimmer of reason; the rest are to be regarded as no more than beasts. For it seems to me no less a miracle to restore reason to someone in whom its light has been completely extinguished, than to restore life to someone who has been dead and buried for four days.
After describing the lamentable situation arising from this opinion's being popularly held, I suddenly introduce a new note quite beyond the bounds of mere reproof, by lashing out at this opinion as something quite horrible when held by those referred to in the text at But as anyone with an eye for the truth knows, the basest type of all. I do this to indicate how unspeakably evil this is, declaring that they most of all betray the truth, for whoever is evil despite being descended from good ancestors is not just base (the opposite of noble), but utterly base. I draw a comparison with the case of a road being pointed out to someone.
To make this comparison clear, I must construct a question, and reply to it, as follows. Imagine a plain crossed by a number of paths; with the exception of the narrow paths across it, the plain is covered with hedges, ditches, stones, timber and every conceivable obstacle. Suppose, further, that there is such a heavy snowfall that snow covers everything and makes the whole plain look alike, with no trace of a path in sight.
Someone comes along from the country on one side, and wishes to make his way to a house that lies on the other side. Through his own resourcefulness, that is, through observation and good native intelligence, with no one but himself for a guide, he reaches his destination by the direct path, leaving behind him the marks of his footprints. Someone else comes along after him making for the same house, who need do no more than follow the marks already made. But through his own fault, he strays from the path marked out by the other person who knew how to keep to it without anyone to guide him; pursuing his way tortuously through the thornbushes and debris, he ends up in the wrong place.
Which of these is to be deemed a person of worth? My reply is: the one who went first. How is the other to be described? Utterly base. Why not call him simply worthless, or base? My reply is: worthless (or base) is an apt word to describe anyone who did not make the journey successfully in the absence of any guidance. Since, however, the person I have been describing did have guidance, his going astray and being at fault are of the very lowest kind, and so he deserves to be called not simply base but utterly base.
If anyone, therefore, is evil although he is descended from a good father or other ancestor, he is not simply base but utterly so, more worthy of contempt and censure than any other base person. It is to put people on their guard against sinking to this, the very depth of baseness, that Solomon in Proverbs commands those who have had a worthy person as an ancestor as follows: "You shall not overstep the ancient bounds set by your fathers." And earlier in the same book he declares: "The path of the just [that is, of worthy peopled] goes forward like a bright light for our steps. The path of the evil is covered in darkness; they do not know where they come to grief."
Finally, where I say of him it can be said without exaggeration: he is dead, yet still walking around, I speak even more forcefully against this utterly base sort of person, saying that he is dead though he appears to be alive. There is a sense in which one can say of an evil person that he really is dead, especially of someone who strays from the path marked out by his good ancestor.
This can be shown as follows. As Aristotle says in On the Soul: "Life is the very essence of a living being." Since, moreover, on the one hand life has many forms (vegetation in plants; vegetation, sensation and movement in animals; vegetation, sensation, movement and reason, or intelligence, in human beings), and, on the other, things take their name from what is most noble in them, it is clear that life for an animal is sensation (I refer here to brute animals) and life for a human being is the use of reason.
If, then, this is what the life and very being of man consists in, to renounce the use of reason is to renounce being, and is thus the same as being dead. And does not everyone who does not set his reason to discover the end to which his life is directed renounce reason? Does not everyone who does not set his reason to discover the path that he must take renounce reason? Certainly he does, and the clearest instance of this is someone who has footsteps to follow, and ignores them.
Hence the saying of Solomon: "Whoever does not submit to the discipline of being guided dies; in the depth of his ignorance he will come to a bad end." This may be glossed: whoever does not make himself a disciple and follow a master is dead. This is precisely the case with the person who is utterly base.
Someone might ask: how can he be dead yet walking around? My reply is: he is dead as a man, but he continues to live as a beast. For as the Philosopher says in On the Soul, the powers of the soul are formed by a series of additions. Just as the figure of the quadrangle is formed by adding to the triangle, and the pentagon (a five-sided figure) by adding to the quadrangle, so the power of sensation is added to that of vegetation, and the intellectual power is added to that of sensation.
Therefore, just as when we take away the final side of a pentagon what remains is a quadrangle, and not a pentagon, so when we take away the final power of the soul, that is, the reason, what remains is not a man, but something with a sensitive soul only, in other words, a brute animal. The above, then, explains the meaning of the second stanza of the canzone, in which the opinions of others are set out.
