To run its course through smoother water

the small bark of my wit now hoists its sail,

leaving that cruel sea behind.            

Now I shall sing the second kingdom,

there where the soul of man is cleansed,

made worthy to ascend to Heaven.                  

Here from the dead let poetry rise up,

O sacred Muses, since I am yours.

Here let Calliope arise                

to accompany my song with those same chords

whose force so struck the miserable magpies

that, hearing it, they lost all hope of pardon.    

Sweet color of oriental sapphire,

hovering in the calm and peaceful aspect

of intervening air, pure to the horizon,     

pleased my eyes once more

as soon as I had left the morbid air

that had afflicted both my chest and eyes.      

The fair planet that emboldens love,

smiling, lit up the east,

veiling the Fishes in her train.         

I turned to the right and, fixing my attention

on the other pole, I saw four stars

not seen but by those first on earth.        

The very sky seemed to rejoice

in their bright glittering.  O widowed

region of the north, denied that sight!       

Once I had drawn my gaze from them,

barely turning toward the other pole

where the constellation of the Wain had set,     

I saw beside me an old man, alone,

who by his looks was so deserving of respect

that no son owes his father more.        

His beard was long and streaked with white,

as was his hair, which fell

in double strands down to his chest.         

The rays of those four holy stars

adorned his face with so much light

he seemed to shine with brightness of the sun.     

'What souls are you to have fled the eternal prison,

climbing against the dark and hidden stream?'

he asked, shaking those venerable locks.      

'Who was your guide or who your lantern

to lead you forth from that deep night

which steeps the vale of Hell in darkness?      

'Are the laws of the abyss thus broken,

or has a new decree been made in Heaven,

that, damned, you stand before my cliffs?'     

My leader then reached out to me

and by his words and signs and with his hands

made me show reverence with knee and brow,      

then answered him: 'I came not on my own.

A lady descended from Heaven and at her request

I lent this man companionship and aid.         

'But since it is your will that I make plain

the true condition of our presence here,

it cannot be that I deny your wish.       

'This man has not yet seen his final sunset,

but through his folly was so close to it

his time was almost at an end.         

'I was sent to him, as I have said,

for his deliverance.  No other way

but this could he be saved.          

'I have shown him all the guilty race

and now intend to let him see those spirits

who cleanse themselves within your charge.     

'How I have led him would take long to tell.

Descending from on high a power aids me

to bring him here that he may see and hear you.     

'May it please you to welcome his arrival,

since he's in search of liberty, which is so dear,

as he well knows who gives his life for it.      

'You know this well, since death in Utica

did not seem bitter, there where you left

the garment that will shine on that great day.    

'Not by us are the eternal edicts broken,

for this man lives and Minos does not bind me,

but I am of the circle where your Marcia        

'implores with her chaste eyes, O holy breast,

that you still think of her as yours.

For love of her, then, I beseech you,        

'allow us passage through your seven kingdoms.

I will report to her your kindness--

if you deign to be mentioned there below.'      

'Marcia so pleased my eyes while I still lived,'

he said, 'that whatever favor

she sought of me, I granted.        

'Now that she dwells beyond the evil stream

she cannot move me any longer,

according to the law made at my deliverance.      

'But if, as you say, a lady from Heaven

moves and directs you, there is no need of flattery.

It is enough you ask it in her name.         

'Go then, make sure you gird him

with a straight reed and bathe his face,

to wipe all traces of defilement from it,      

'for it would not be fitting to appear,

his eyes still dimmed by any mist,

before the minister, the first from Paradise.    

'This little island, at its lowest point,

there where the waves beat down on it,

grows reeds in the soft and pliant mud.     

'There no other plant can leaf,

or harden to endure,

without succumbing to the battering waves.    

'After you are done, do not come back this way.

The sun, now rising, will disclose

an easier ascent to gain the peak.'     

With that he vanished, and I stood up,

speechless.  Coming closer to my leader,

I turned my eyes to him.        

He began: 'My son, follow my steps.

Let us turn around, for this plain slopes

from here, down to its lowest edge.'     

Dawn was overtaking the darkness of the hour,

which fled before it, and I saw and knew

the distant trembling of the sea.       

We went along the lonely plain,

like someone who has lost the way

and thinks he strays until he finds the road.   

When we came to a place where the dew

can hold its own against the sun

because it is protected by a breeze,     

my master spread his hands

gently upon the grass.

And I, who understood what he intended,     

raised my tear-stained cheeks

and he restored the color

Hell had obscured in me.        

Now we came to the empty shore.

Upon those waters no man ever sailed

who then experienced his return.      

There he girded me as pleased Another.

What a wonder it was that the humble plant

he chose to pick sprang up at once

in the very place where he had plucked it.    

