The pallor cowardice had painted on my face

when I saw my leader turning back

made him hasten to compose his features.

He stopped, like a man intent on listening,

for the eye could not probe far

through that dim air and murky fog.

'Yet we must win this fight,' he began,

'or else . . . .   Such help was promised us.

How long it seems to me till someone comes!'

I clearly saw that he had covered up

his first words with the others that came after,

words so different in meaning.

Still, I was filled with fear by what he said.

Perhaps I understood his broken phrase

to hold worse meaning than it did.

'Does ever anyone from the first circle,

where the only penalty is hope cut off,

descend so deep into this dismal pit?'

I put this question and he answered:

'It seldom happens that a soul from Limbo

undertakes the journey I am on.

'It is true I came here once before,

conjured by pitiless Erichtho,

who could call shades back to their bodies.

'I had not long been naked of my flesh

when she forced me to go inside that wall

to fetch a spirit from the circle of Judas.

'That is the lowest place, the darkest,

and furthest from the heaven that encircles all.

Well do I know the way -- so have no fear.

'This swamp, which belches forth such noxious stench,

hems in the woeful city, circles it.

Now we cannot enter without wrath.'

And he said more, but I do not remember,

for my eyes and thoughts were drawn

to the high tower's blazing peak

where all at once, erect, had risen

three hellish, blood-stained Furies:

they had the limbs and shape of women,

their waists encircled by green hydras.

Thin serpents and horned snakes entwined,

in place of hair, their savage brows.

And he, who knew full well the handmaids

to the queen of endless lamentation,

said to me: 'See the fierce Erinyes.

'That is Megaera on the left.  On the right

Alecto wails.  In the middle

is Tisiphone.'  And with that he fell silent.

Each rent her breast with her own nails.

And with their palms they struck themselves, shrieking.

In fear I pressed close to the poet.

'Let Medusa come and we'll turn him to stone,'

they cried, looking down.  'To our cost,

we failed to avenge the assault of Theseus.'

'Turn your back and keep your eyes shut,

for if the Gorgon head appears and should you see it,

all chance for your return above is lost.'

While my master spoke he turned me round

and, still not trusting to my hands,

covered my face with his hands also.

O you who have sound intellects,

consider the teaching that is hidden

behind the veil of these strange verses.

And now there came, over the turbid waves,

a dreadful, crashing sound

that set both shores to trembling.

It sounded like a mighty wind,

made violent by waves of heat,

that strikes the forest and with unchecked force

shatters the branches, hurls them away, and,

magnificent in its roiling cloud of dust, drives on,

putting beast and shepherd to flight. 

He freed my eyes and said: 'Now look

across the scum of that primeval swamp

to where the vapor is most dense and harsh.'

As frogs, before their enemy the snake,

all scatter through the water

till each sits huddled on the bank,

I saw more than a thousand lost souls flee

before one who so lightly passed across the Styx

he did not touch the water with his feet.

He cleared the thick air from his face,

his left hand moving it away,

as if that murky air alone had wearied him.

It was clear that he was sent from Heaven,

and I turned to the master, who signaled me

to keep silent and bow down before him.

Ah, how full of high disdain he seemed to me!

He came up to the gate and with a wand

opened it, and there was no resistance.

'O outcasts of Heaven, race despised,'

he began on the terrible threshold, 'whence

comes this insolence you harbor in your souls?

'Why do you kick against that will

which never can be severed from its purpose,

and has so many times increased your pain?  

'What profits it to fight against the fates?

Remember your own Cerberus still bears

the wounds of that around his chin and neck.'

Then he turned back along the wretched way

without a word for us, and he seemed pressed,

spurred on by greater cares

than those of the man who stands before him.

We turned our steps toward the city,

emboldened by his holy words.

We entered without further struggle.

And I, in my great need to see

what such a guarded fortress holds,

as soon as I had entered eagerly surveyed

the wide plain stretching on all sides,

so filled with bitter torment and despair.

Just as at Arles where the Rhone goes shallow,

just as at Pola, near Quarnero's gulf,

which hems in Italy and bathes her borders,

the sepulchers make the land uneven,

so all around me in this landscape

the many tombs held even greater sorrow.

For here the graves were strewn with flames

that made them glow with heat

hotter than iron is before it's worked.

All their covers were propped open and from them

issued such dire lamentation it was clear

it came from wretches in despair and pain.

And I: 'Master, who are these souls

entombed within these chests and who make known

their plight with sighs of sorrow?'

And he: 'Here, with all their followers,

are the arch-heretics of every sect.

The tombs are far more laden than you think.

'Like is buried here with like,

though the graves burn with an unlike heat.'

Then, after he turned to the right,

we passed between the torments and the lofty ramparts.

