Now that the meaning of the introduction has been made clear, it is time to turn to the treatise itself. The best way to begin clarifying its meaning is to note that it falls into three parts. The first deals with what some people think nobility is; the second sets out the true view of this; in the third the canzone itself is addressed by way of an adornment of what is said in the body of the poem.
The second part begins: I affirm that every virtue stems ultimately; and the third: My poem against-the-erring, you must be off! In addition to noting these major parts, I must point out other divisions, in order to convey a clear understanding of what I endeavour to explain.
It should occasion no surprise, then, that the unfolding of the theme involves a multiplicity of divisions, since an important and difficult task is being undertaken here, and one in which established authors have taken little interest; nor is it surprising that the treatise to which I am introducing the reader has to be long and subtle, if I am to disentangle all the strands of meaning contained in the text.
The first part, then, is divided into two sections: in the first I give an account of the opinions of others; in the second I refute these. The second section begins: Whoever gives the definition "man is wood that is animate".
The first section itself has two subsections: the first gives an account of how the opinion of the emperor is false; the second does the same with regard to the opinion held by the general populace, an opinion that is, in fact, completely worthless. This second subsection begins: And someone else, of a shallower cast of mind.
I begin, then, One ruler of the empire, that is, one who held the imperial office. When asked how he would define nobility, Frederick the Swabian, the last emperor of the Romans, replied that it consisted in age-old wealth and pleasing manners.
I go on: Someone else, of a shallower cast of mind: after much thought and reflection on this definition from every angle, this person dispensed with the last feature (pleasing manners), and restricted himself to the first (age-old wealth). As the text says with feigned hesitation, perhaps it was because this person did not himself possess pleasing manners, and yet did not want to forfeit his title to nobility, that he defined it in a way that suited him: the possession of age-old wealth.
I go on to imply that this opinion is held by almost everyone, when I say that they all follow his lead who hold that anyone is noble simply because he belongs to a family that has been wealthy for a long time, for this is barked in almost universal chorus.
It seems that these two opinions can draw on two very important sources for support (though, as I have said, one of these opinions simply does not merit attention). The first is the belief of the Philosopher that it is impossible that what the majority of people holds should be totally false; the other is the authority of the emperor, which is to be held in the highest esteem.
To bring out more clearly how convincing the truth is, which is superior to every authority, I shall now discuss exactly what bearing and weight each of these sources has. Since one cannot know what value to attach to imperial authority unless one traces this to its root, I shall first devote a special chapter to discussing this topic.
