I may begin, then, by saying that after the passing away of the blessed Beatrice, who lives in heaven with the angels and on earth with my soul, the star of Venus has completed two revolutions in that circle of hers which brings her into view in the evening or in the morning, according to the time of year, when that noble lady of whom I made mention at the end of The New Life first appeared before my eyes accompanied by Love, and made a certain place for herself in my mind.
As I recount in that little book, it came about, rather as a result of her nobility than of my choice, that I consented to be hers, for she showed herself to be moved by such deep compassion for my widowed life that the spirits of my eyes made themselves her friends above all else. Having become so, they then formed such an impression of her within me that my will was drawn to find its happiness in putting itself at the disposal of that image.
However, it is not in an instant that love is born and grows and reaches perfection: it requires a certain passage of time, and nourishment from thoughts, especially where contrary thoughts hinder its progress. So before this new love could become perfect, a great struggle had to take place between the thought that nourished it and the thought that opposed it, that is, the thought that still held the citadel of my mind on behalf of the glorious Beatrice.
Since one drew help continually from what lay before, that is, from sight of that lady, while the other drew its help from what lay behind, that is, from my memory, and since the help drawn from what lay before grew with each passing day, something made impossible for the other by the new thought, which completely prevented any backward look – all this seemed so astonishing to me, and such a painful experience, that I was unable to endure it.
In what was at once a cry from the heart and an attempt to justify the change newly occurring within me, which seemed to imply a want of strength on my part, I directed my voice to the quarter whence flowed the victory of the new thought, which had all the strength of a power drawn from the heavens. I began with the words: You who move the third heaven by understanding.
To set about understanding this canzone properly, the reader must first know how it is divided, for this will enable him later to understand it readily. To obviate the necessity of having to prefix this same remark to the commentaries on the other canzoni, I declare here that the mode of proceeding adopted in this book, namely, that of treating each part in turn, is the one I intend to follow in all the subsequent books.
The canzone given above, then, has three main parts. The first consists of the first stanza; in this, certain Intelligences (or, as we would more commonly say, Angels) are urged to listen to what I propose to say, specifically those Intelligences which cause the revolution of the heaven of Venus.
The second part consists of the next three stanzas; in this is described the exchange between contrasting thoughts that took place in the depths of my spirit.
The third consists of the fifth and final stanza; in this the author's point is to address the work itself, as if offering it encouragement. As was said above, each of the three parts will be explained in turn.
