Having finished with this digression, which was necessary to bring out the truth, I return to the main theme. I declare that just as our eyes "call", that is, judge, the star to be other than it is in actual fact, so that little ballata described this lady according as she appeared, thereby conflicting with the truth, on account of a sickness of the soul which was impassioned by excessive desire.
I indicate this when I say: for the soul was fearful, so that when the lady was present the impression I had of her was one of harshness. Here it should be explained that the more the agent unites itself with what is passive to its influence the greater is the resulting passion, as is apparent from the view expressed by the Philosopher in his work On Generation. And so the closer the thing desired approaches the one who desires, the stronger the passion becomes, and the more fully the soul, having become more impassioned, identifies itself with the emotional part and the more completely it abandons reason. Consequently, when that occurs the person does not judge like a human being but rather like any other animal, according to appearance only, without discerning the truth.
That is why her attitude, while being in fact courteous, seems to us disdainful and harsh; it was according to a sensual judgment of this kind that that little ballata spoke. Thus it is perfectly plain that this canzone describes this lady in accordance with the truth, since its account conflicts with that of the other poem.
It is not without good cause that I say when this lady perceives me, rather than when I perceive this lady: by this phrase I wish to convey the great power which her eyes had over me, for their rays passed through me on all sides, as if I were something diaphanous. Natural and supernatural reasons might be adduced to explain this; but here let it suffice to have said this much – I shall discuss the subject later at a more appropriate point.
When I continue: Excuse yourself in this way, if need arise, I instruct the canzone how, for the reasons given, "it should excuse itself when there is need to do so", that is, when someone is puzzled by this discrepancy. This is as much as to say: if someone is puzzled by the fact that this canzone conflicts with that little ballata, let him consider the explanation just given.
It is highly commendable, and indeed necessary to use this figure of speech, in which the words are directed to one person and their intention to another, for while admonishment is always commendable and necessary it is not always appropriate that it be voiced by anyone whomever.
So when a son is aware of a fault in his father, or when a subject is aware of a fault in his lord, or when a person knows that to admonish a friend would increase his shame or diminish his honour, or when he knows that his friend is not receptive to admonishment but is angered by it, this is a most graceful and useful figure, to which we may give the name dissimulation.
Its strategy is similar to that of a wise soldier who attacks a castle on one side in order to draw off the defences from another, for the intention to bring help and the assault are not directed to the same side.
I also require of the canzone that it ask leave of this lady to speak of her. Here I imply that one ought not to presume to praise someone without first giving much thought to whether doing so will bring pleasure to the one who is praised, for it often happens that a person who believes that he is conferring praise on someone is actually bringing him into disrepute, whether through the fault of the speaker or that of the listener.
So in this matter great discretion is called for: such discretion takes the form of asking permission, in the way in which I say this canzone should do. This brings to an end the entire account of the literal meaning of this treatise. And so the plan of this work requires that I now proceed to the allegorical exposition, in which the truth will be made plain.
