Now one of the stony borders bears us on

and vapor from the stream arose as mist

protecting banks and water from the flames.

As the Flemings between Wissant and Bruges,

fearing the tide that rushes in upon them,

erect a bulwark to repel the sea,

and as the Paduans build dikes along the Brenta,

to protect their towns and castles

before the heat brings floods to Carentana -- 

in just that way these banks were formed,

except the architect, whoever he was,

had made them not as lofty nor as thick.

By now we were so distant from the wood

that I could not have made it out,

even had I turned in its direction.

Here we met a troop of souls

coming up along the bank, and each

gazed at us as men at dusk will sometimes do,

eyeing one another under the new moon.

They peered at us with knitted brows

like an old tailor at his needle's eye.

Thus scrutinized by such a company,

I was known to one of them who caught me

by the hem and then cried out, 'What a wonder!'

And while he held his arm outstretched to me,

I fixed my eyes on his scorched face 

until beneath the charred disfigurement

I could discern the features that I knew

and, lowering my hand toward his face,

said: 'Are You here, Ser Brunetto?'

And he: 'O my son, let it not displease you

if Brunetto Latini for a while turns back

with you and lets the troop go on.'

I said to him: 'With all my heart, I pray You,

and if You would have me sit with You, I will,

if he who leads me through allows.'

'O son,' he said 'whoever of this flock stops

even for an instant has to lie a hundred years,

unable to fend off the fire when it strikes.

'Therefore, go on.  I shall follow at your hem

and later will rejoin my band,

who go lamenting their eternal pain.'

I did not dare to leave the higher path

to walk the lower with him, but I kept

my head bowed, like one who walks in reverence.

He began: 'What chance or fate is it

that brings you here before your final hour,

and who is this that shows the way?'

'In the sunlit life above,' I answered,

'in a valley there, I lost my way

before I reached the zenith of my days.

'Only yesterday morning did I leave it,

but had turned back when he appeared,

and now along this road he leads me home.'

And he to me: 'By following your star

you cannot fail to reach a glorious port,

if I saw clearly in the happy life.

'Had I not died too soon,

seeing that Heaven so favors you,

I would have lent you comfort in your work.

'But that malignant, thankless rabble

that came down from Fiesole long ago

and still smacks of the mountain and the rock

'rightly shall become, because of your good deeds,

your enemy: among the bitter sorbs

it is not fit the sweet fig come to fruit.

'The world has long believed them to be blind,

a people greedy, envious and proud.

Be sure you stay untainted by their habits.

'Your destiny reserves for you such honor

both parties shall be hungry to devour you,

but the grass shall be far from the goat.

'Let the Fiesolan beasts make forage

of themselves but spare the plant,

if on their dung-heap any still springs up,

'the plant in which lives on the holy seed

of those few Romans who remained

when it became the home of so much malice.'

'If all my prayers were answered,'

I said to him, 'You would not yet

be banished from mankind.

'For I remember well and now lament

the cherished, kind, paternal image of You

when, there in the world, from time to time,

'You taught me how man makes himself immortal.

And how much gratitude I owe for that

my tongue, while I still live, must give report.'

'What You tell of my future I record

and keep for glossing, along with other texts,

by a lady of discernment, should I reach her.

'This much I would have You know:

as long as conscience does not chide,

I am prepared for Fortune as she wills.

'Such prophecy is not unknown to me.

Let Fortune spin her wheel just as she pleases,

and let the loutish peasant ply his hoe.'

At that I saw the right side of my master's face

turned back in my direction.  And he said:

'He listens well who takes in what he hears.'

Nonetheless, I go on speaking

with ser Brunetto, asking who, of his companions,

are most eminent, most worthy to be known.

And he: "Some of them it is good to know.

Others it is better not to mention,

for the time would be too short for so much talk.

'In sum, note that all of them were clerics

or great and famous scholars, befouled

in the world above by a single sin.

'Priscian goes with that wretched crowd,

and Francesco d'Accorso too.  And, had you had

a hankering for such filth, you might have seen

the one transferred by the Servant of Servants

from the Arno to the Bacchiglione,

where he left his sin-stretched sinews.

'I would say more, but I cannot stay,

cannot continue talking, for over there I see

new smoke rising from the sand.

'People are coming with whom I must not be.

Let my Treasure, in which I still live on,

be in your mind -- I ask for nothing more.'

After he turned back he seemed like one

who races for the green cloth on the plain

beyond Verona.  And he looked more the winner

than the one who trails the field.

