Regarding the first part, then, which was composed as a preface to this canzone, I declare that it is to be divided into three sections. For it first touches on the ineffable nature of this theme; then it tells of my inadequacy to treat this perfectly – this second section begins And undoubtedly... I must first leave aside. Finally I excuse myself with respect to this inadequacy, saying that no blame is to be attributed to me on its account; I begin this section where I say: So if my poems... be wanting.
I say then: Love which discourses to me... in my mind. Here the most important points requiring elucidation are: who is discoursing, and where the discourse is said to take place.
Love, if we truly recognize it and carefully consider it, is seen to be nothing other than a spiritual union between the soul and the thing loved; the soul by its very nature seeks this union, either quickly or slowly, according as it is free or impeded.
The reason for this natural tendency may be given as follows: every substantial form proceeds from its first cause, who is God, as is stated in the Book of Causes; each form becomes diverse in individuals not through that cause, which is utterly simple, but through secondary causes and through the matter into which the form descends. So in that same book, where it treats of the infusion of divine goodness, we find the words: "The various kinds of goodness and gifts are made diverse through uniting with the things that receive them."
Since every effect retains something of the nature of its cause, every form receives the being of the divine nature in some way. This is not to say that the divine nature is divided and distributed among the forms, but that it is participated in by them in something like the way that the nature of the sun is participated in by the other stars.
And the more noble the form the more it contains of that nature; so the human soul, which is the most noble of these forms generated beneath the heavens, receives more of the divine nature than any other such form.
Since, furthermore, what is most natural to God is the will to be, because, as we read in the book quoted above: "The primary category is being, and anterior to it there is simply nothing", the human soul naturally wishes to be, with all its desire. And since its being depends on God and is conserved by Him, it naturally desires and wills to be united to God in order to strengthen its own being.
Moreover, since it is in the various kinds of goodness found in nature that the divine goodness shows itself, it comes about that the human soul naturally unites itself with these in a spiritual way, and does so more quickly and strongly the more perfect these appear; and their appearing such occurs according as the soul's knowledge is clear or impeded.
This union is what we call love, thanks to which we may know what a soul is like within by observing on the outside what it loves. This love, that is, the union of my soul with this noble lady, in whom the divine light showed itself to me abundantly, is the one I speak of as discoursing, and I describe it as doing so because from it thoughts continually arose which considered and reflected on the worth of this lady who spiritually had become one with my soul.
The place in which I say that this discourse occurs is the mind. But simply referring to the mind does not make the meaning any clearer, and so I must explain the exact meaning of this word.
I declare, then, that the Philosopher, when distinguishing the various powers of the soul in his work On the Soul, says that it has three principal powers: life, sensation and reason.
As he says, it is perfectly clear that these powers are related in such a way that one is the basis of the other, and, further, that any power which acts as a basis can exist as a separate being, but a power which is based on another power cannot exist in separation from that power. The vegetative power, then, through which a thing has life, is the basis on which that thing senses (that is, sees, hears, tastes, smells and touches); this vegetative power may by itself constitute a soul, as is evident from the plant world.
The sensitive power cannot exist without the vegetative; there is no such thing as something which senses but does not have life. And this sensitive power is the basis of the intellectual power, that is, of reason; and so in mortal beings which have souls, the rational power is not found without the sensitive power, but the sensitive power is found without the rational, as we observe in beasts, birds, fish and every animate thing at the brute level.
The soul which combines all these powers, the most perfect of all souls, is the human soul, which, through the nobility of its highest power, reason, participates in the divine nature in a similar way to that of an eternal intelligence, for in this sovereign power the soul is ennobled, and stripped of matter to such a degree that the divine light shines into it as into an angel; philosophers, consequently, call man a divine animal.
In this the most noble part of the soul there are several capacities, as Aristotle indicates, particularly in the third book of On the Soul, where he says that in it there is a capacity called scientific, and one called the reasoning or deliberative capacity, which itself includes specific capacities such as those of deduction and of judging.
All these most noble capacities and others to be found in that most excellent power are collectively referred to by the term which called for explanation, namely, the mind. It is clear, then, that by the term mind is to be understood this highest and most noble part of the soul.
It is evident that this was what I meant, for the mind is predicated only of man and of the divine substances, as may clearly be seen from Boethius, who predicates it first of men, when he says to Philosophy, "You and God who sent you into the minds of men", and then of God, when he says to God, "You produce all things in accordance with the heavenly exemplar, you, the supremely beautiful one, who bear the beautiful world within your mind."
And the mind was never predicated of a brute animal. Indeed, it does not seem possible or right to predicate it of many men, who appear to be defective in their most perfect part; that is why such people are called in Latin "amentes" and "dementes", that is, lacking a mind. From all this it will be clear what is meant by the word mind: that subtle and most precious part of the soul which is divinity. This is the place to which I refer when I say that Love discourses to me about my lady.
