Now that we have seen how, in beginning the praises of this lady, I subtly present her as pertaining to the divine essence when considered in her primary form, it is time to go on and see how I present her as existing secondly in created intelligences.
I say, then: Every Intellect there on high gazes on her. It should be explained here that by the words "there on high" I indicate a relationship to God, who has already been mentioned; and I thereby exclude the Intelligences who live in exile from their heavenly fatherland, who cannot philosophize, because in them love is entirely extinct, and, as has been explained, love is intrinsic to philosophizing. It is evident, then, that the Intelligences in hell are deprived of the sight of this most beautiful lady; and, since she constitutes the happiness of the intellect, to be deprived of her is bitter in the extreme and full of utter sadness.
In the words which follow, And those people who here are in love, I come down the scale of being to explain how philosophy in a secondary sense comes into the human intelligence, too; I then devote the rest of this treatise to philosophy as it exists in the human being, by way of praising it. I say, then, that people who are in love "here", that is, in this life, experience her in their thoughts not at all times but when Love gives them experience of her peace. Here three points touched on in this text must be grasped.
The first is mentioned when I say: people who here are in love, where it is evident that a distinction is made among human beings. It is necessary to make such a distinction because, as is abundantly clear, and as will be expressly discussed in the following book, the vast majority of mankind live rather according to their sensual nature than according to their reason; and it is impossible for those who live according to their senses to love this woman because they can have no knowledge of her.
The second point is mentioned when I say: When Love gives them some experience, where it is clear that a distinction in time is being made. It is necessary to make this distinction, too, for although the pure Intelligences gaze on this woman unceasingly, the human intelligence is incapable of doing so, since human nature has need of many things for its sustenance besides contemplation, which satisfies the intellect and the reason. Consequently, our wisdom is at times habitual only, and not actual, which is not the case with the other Intelligences, whose perfection consists of a nature that is entirely intellectual.
So when our soul is not actually contemplating it cannot truly be described as being in the realm of philosophy, except in so far as it possesses philosophy by way of a habit and has the power of being able to rouse it into activity. And so those people who here are in love are sometimes in the company of philosophy, and sometimes not.
The third point is mentioned when I speak of when it is that those people are in her company, namely, when Love gives experience of her peace; this refers to the time when the human being is actually contemplating, for study gives no experience of this lady's peace except in the act of contemplation. So it is clear how this lady pertains primarily to God, and secondarily to the other pure Intelligences through their continuously beholding her, and then to the human intelligence through its beholding her discontinuously.
However, he who has this woman as his lady is always to be called a philosopher, despite the fact that he is not always in the very act of philosophizing, since a person is to be designated principally on the basis of habit. Thus we say that someone is virtuous not only when he is acting virtuously but also when he possesses the habit of being virtuous; we say that someone is eloquent even when he is not speaking, on account of the habit of being eloquent, that is, of being a good speaker. The subject of the commendations which now follow will be this Philosophy as participated in by the human intelligence, and their aim will be to show what a large measure of its goodness has been granted to human nature.
I go on, then, to say: "So greatly does her being please the one who bestows it on her" – from whom it derives as from its primal source – "that He unceasingly pours His power into her beyond the capacity of our nature", which He makes beautiful and virtuous. So although some people attain an habitual power to philosophize, no one attains it to such a degree that it can be called an habitual power strictly speaking, because the first study, through which the power is generated, cannot perfectly acquire possession of Philosophy.
And here the note of humility in our praise becomes evident: for whether in her perfect or imperfect form she never forfeits the name of perfection. On account of this transcendent quality of hers I say that the soul of Philosophy makes it clear in what she brings, that is, makes clear that God unceasingly imparts to her a measure of His light. In this regard what was said above should be recalled, that love is the form of Philosophy; and so here it is called her soul.
This love is manifest in the exercise of wisdom, which brings with it wonderful beauties, namely, contentment in every temporal condition and scorn for those things which others make lords over them. What then happens is that the others living a miserable life who witness this think better of their fault and, moved by the desire for perfection, fall to pining and sighing; this is what is meant by the words: the eyes of those on whom she shines send to the heart messengers full of desires, which father air and turn into sighs.
