Now that I have set out the opinions held by others on nobility, and shown that I have a right to refute them, it is time to comment on the part of the poem which contains this refutation. This begins, as I noted above, Whoever gives the definition "man is wood that is animate". I should explain that the opinion of the emperor that manners form part of nobility, reflected in the definition where it speaks of "pleasing manners", is correct as far as it goes (though it is not the whole truth), and so I do not intend to refute him on that score.
What I do intend to refute is the other part, whose content is quite foreign to nobility: there his opinion seems to imply two components, in the words age-old wealth, namely, time and riches, which are quite foreign to nobility, as has been said and as I shall prove below. My refutation, therefore, is in two parts: I first refute the idea that riches are the cause of nobility, then do the same with regard to time. The second part begins: Advocates of that view maintain that a base man cannot himself become noble.
It should be recognized that where my refutation deals with riches it refutes not only that part of the emperor's opinion which touches on riches, but the opinion of the common people in its entirety, which makes nobility depend only on riches. The first part has two subdivisions: in the first of these I simply assert that the emperor was mistaken in his definition of nobility; in the second I give my grounds for saying this. The second subdivision begins: For, common opinion notwithstanding, riches.
I state, then, that Whoever gives the definition "man is wood that is animate" first asserts what is not true, that is, something false, where he speaks of "wood", and then adds to his error something that is less than fully accurate, that is, his statement is not completely correct, in that he says "animate" without making any reference to "rational", though it is rationality that distinguishes men from animals.
I go on to say that The one who held the emperorship was similarly mistaken in his definition. I avoid the word "emperor" and speak of "the one who held the emperorship" to make clear that (as I discussed above) determining what the truth is in this matter falls outside the scope of the imperial office. I continue by saying that he, too, was mistaken, since first he made a mistake regarding the generic subject of nobility, saying that it was "age-old wealth", and then he added a defective specification or differentiating quality, namely, "pleasing manners". These last do not cover the full range of qualities denoting nobility; indeed they cover only a fraction of them, as I shall show below.
Though the text is silent on the point, it should not be passed over that his lordship the emperor erred in this matter not only regarding the components he posits in his definition, but in the very way he constructed his definition, even though he was a great thinker and scholar (as indicated by the high reputation he still enjoys). For nobility would more properly be defined by reference to its effects than to its sources, since it would seem necessary to classify nobility as a source, and a source cannot be described in terms of the principles of its own being, but in terms of what results from its existence.
Where I say For, common opinion notwithstanding, riches, I show, first that riches cannot cause nobility, because they are base, then that they cannot take nobility away, because they are quite distinct from it. I prove that they are base by drawing attention to one of their most important and most obvious defects, in the lines beginning: It is clear that riches are base and imperfect.
My final conclusion concerns a subject mentioned above: the upright mind is not shattered by their loss. This is proof of what has just been mentioned, that riches are something quite distinct from nobility, since the effect that would follow if they were connected does not, in fact, occur. Here we should recall the principle, stated by the Philosopher, that in all causality the perfection in the things caused must first belong in the highest degree to the essence of the cause itself. In the Metaphysics he states: "When one thing is brought into being by another, it is brought into being by a cause whose essence itself possesses the perfection caused."
Similarly, it should be recalled that when anything decays it does so as the result of a change being effected in it, and everything that suffers change must be in contact with the cause that effects the change, as the Philosopher says in the Physics and in On Generation. Having made these points, I go on to say that riches cannot be the source of nobility, as others think, and I add (to draw out further the difference between the two) that neither can they take away nobility from anyone who possesses it.
Riches cannot be the source of nobility, since they are base by their very nature; this baseness makes them contrary to nobility. Baseness here is equivalent to "the cause of imperfection"; this makes baseness the opposite of nobility, for whatever causes an effect contrary to something is, and must be, itself contrary to that thing, for the reason given. This reason I touch on briefly when I add to the text: And we know that a painter.
For no painter can depict externally any image that he has not first created in his own mind exactly as it is to appear. Furthermore, wealth cannot take nobility away from anyone, since it is far removed from it, again for the reason given above: whatever changes something, or causes it to decay, must be in contact with it.
This is indicated by the words: And no upright tower can be made to lean by a riser that flows at a distance. These lines simply draw out something said above, that riches cannot take away nobility: nobility is compared to an upright tower, and riches to a river that flows at a distance.
