In the preceding chapter I commended this glorious lady with respect to one of her constitutive parts, love. In this chapter – which I shall devote to commenting on the stanza beginning: Things appear in her countenance – I must proceed with the discussion by commending her other part, wisdom.
The text says, then, "that in her face things appear which show some of the pleasures of Paradise", and it specifies where these appear: in her eyes and in her smile. It should be explained here that the eyes of wisdom are her demonstrations, by which the truth is seen with absolute certainty, and her smile is her persuasions, in which the light interior to wisdom shows itself under a kind of veil. In these two places experience is given of that most sublime of pleasures, happiness, which is the greatest good enjoyed in Paradise.
This pleasure is not to be found here below except in gazing on those eyes and on that smile. The reason for this is as follows: since every being naturally desires its own perfection, without this perfection man cannot be content, that is, happy. For however abundantly he might possess other things, without perfection desire would still be present in him, and desire cannot coexist with happiness, since happiness is something perfect, while desire is something defective, because no one desires what he has, but what he does not have, which clearly entails a defect.
It is in this look alone, then, that human perfection is acquired, that is, the perfection of the reason, on which, as on its most important part, our whole essence depends; and all our other activities (sensation, nutrition and all the rest) exist for reason's sake alone, while it exists for its own sake, and not for others', so that when it attains perfection so, too, does man's essence in that man precisely as man finds every desire brought to fulfilment, and is, therefore, happy.
And so the Book of Wisdom declares: "Whoever casts away wisdom and learning is unhappy", that is, he is deprived of being happy. It follows that one attains to being happy through the habitual possession of wisdom; and to be happy is to be content, in the view of the Philosopher. It is clear, then, how in the countenance of that lady appear things telling something of Paradise. So we find that same Book of Wisdom speaking of her in these terms: "She is the brightness of the eternal light and the faultless mirror of the majesty of God."
When the poem continues: They overwhelm our intellect, I excuse myself as regards the fact that I can say little about these things, because they are overwhelming. Here it should be explained that in a certain way these dazzle our intellect, in that they affirm the existence of certain things on which our intellect cannot look, namely, God, eternity and prime matter: we can perceive with absolute certainty and believe with total confidence that they exist, but we cannot understand them by grasping what they are; it is only by way of negation that one can approach to knowledge of them, and not otherwise.
However, at this point a person may seriously wonder how it can be that wisdom can make man happy, if it cannot perfectly show certain things to him, since the natural desire of man is to know, and he cannot be happy unless that desire is satisfied.
To this the clear answer can be given that the natural desire in everything is in accordance with the capacity of the thing which desires; otherwise the thing would strive in a fashion contrary to its own being, which is impossible; and Nature would have made it in vain, which is also impossible.
It would strive in a self-contrary fashion, for in desiring its own perfection it would desire its own imperfection, because it would desire always to be desiring and never to satisfy its own desire (which is the error into which the accursed miser falls: he does not recognize that he desires always to be desiring, in striving after a number impossible to reach). Also, Nature would have made it in vain, because it would not be directed to any end. Human desire, consequently, is measured in this life in accordance with that knowledge which can be gained here, and never passes that point except in error, which is something foreign to the intention of nature.
In the angelic nature desire is likewise measured, and is limited precisely to that wisdom which the nature of each is capable of apprehending. It is for this reason, too, that the saints do not envy each other, for each attains the end of his own desire, and this desire is commensurate with the quality of his goodness. Since, then, it is impossible for our nature to know of God what He is (the same holds true of certain other things), this is not something which we naturally desire to know. In this way the puzzle is resolved.
When the text continues: Her beauty rains down flames of fire, it descends to another pleasure of Paradise, that of the happiness which is secondary to this first, and proceeds from her beauty. Here it should be explained that morality is the beauty of Philosophy, for just as the beauty of the body results from its members in so far as they are duly ordered, so the beauty of wisdom, which is the body of Philosophy (as has been said), results from the order among the moral virtues, which makes
Philosophy palpably pleasing. I say, therefore, that her beauty, morality, rains down flames of fire, that is, right desire, which is generated by the pleasure found in moral doctrine; this desire distances us even from the natural vices, not simply from the other vices. And thus there arises that happiness which Aristotle defines in the first book of the Ethics, where he says that it consists in activity in accordance with virtue, in a life that is perfect.
When the text says: So let any woman who hears her beauty, it continues with her praises by crying out to people to follow her, telling them of the benefit she brings, namely, that by following her everyone becomes good. So it says, let any woman, that is, any soul, who hears her beauty criticized for not showing qualities which it ought, gaze on this exemplar.
It should be explained here that modes of behaviour constitute the beauty of the soul; this holds, above all, of the virtues, which sometimes through shallowness or pride become less beautiful and less attractive, as will be made clear in the final treatise. And so I say that to avoid this people should look on her, and specifically on her as the exemplar of humility, that is, on that part of her which is called moral philosophy. I add that by gazing on that part of her (that is, of Wisdom) all those marred by vices will become right and good again, and so I say: she is the one who humbles all who have gone awry, that is, she gently turns back whoever is bent away from the right order.
Finally, voicing the highest praise of Wisdom, I declare that she is the mother of all and the source of every movement, when I say that with her God began the universe, and in particular the movement of the heavens, which generates all things and from which every movement has its origin and impulse, at the words: He thought of her who set the universe in motion. What this means is that she was in God's thought (which is identical with His intellect) when He made the universe; from this it follows that she made it.
That is why Solomon, speaking in the person of Wisdom, said in the Book of Proverbs: "When God prepared the heavens I was present; when he bound in the deeps by a fixed law and a fixed limit, when up above He set the ether in place and hung the fountains of water, when He encircled the sea with its boundary and gave a law to the waters that they should not pass their borders, when He laid the foundations of the earth, I was with Him, setting everything in order, and finding delight day after day."
O worse than dead, you who shun her friendship, open your eyes and observe: for before you came to be she was your lover, preparing and planning the form of your life; and after you were created, to direct you aright, she came to you as one like yourselves.
And if you cannot all attain to sight of her, honour her in her friends and follow their commands, as those who proclaim to you the will of this eternal empress – do not be deaf to Solomon's words when he speaks in this vein, declaring that "the way of the just is like a resplendent light, which spreads and grows brighter until the daytime of happiness" – pursue them and observe their actions, which should be a light for you on the journey through this fleeting life.
Here I may end the account of the true meaning of the present canzone. Certainly the final stanza, composed as a tornata, can readily be interpreted in the present context from what was said in the literal commentary, except with respect to my saying that I once called this lady harsh and disdainful. It should be explained here that as regards her bodily part, that is, wisdom, Philosophy at first appeared to me to be harsh, because she did not smile on me in that I did not yet pay attention to her persuasions, and to be disdainful, because she did not turn her eyes on me, that is, I could not perceive her demonstrations.
In all this the fault lay with me. From what has been said here, and from what was given in the account of the literal meaning, the allegorical sense of the tornata is clear. It is time, then, to bring this treatise to a close, in order to make further progress.
