Benevolent will, in which a righteous love
whose breath is true must always show itself,
as does cupidity within an evil will,
had silenced the sweet-sounding lyre
and hushed the sacred strings that Heaven's right hand
loosens and draws taut.
How can they be deaf to righteous prayers,
the very spirits who, to prompt my prayers, 
fell silent as with one accord?
It is well that endless be his grief
who, for love of things that do not last,
casts off a love that never dies.
As through the clear and tranquil evening sky
from time to time a sudden fire will shoot,
drawing the eyes that just before had calmly gazed,
and seems a star escaping from its place -- 
except from where it first was kindled
no star is missing and it lasts but a brief while --
so from the arm of that great cross
extending on the right a star raced to the foot
of the resplendent constellation there.
Nor did this jewel leave its ribbon,
but ran along the shining band so that
it seemed a flame that glows in alabaster.
With such affection did Anchises' shade reach out,
if our greatest muse is owed belief,
when in Elysium he knew his son.
Thus spoke that light.  And I gave heed,
then turned my eyes back to my lady -- 
whichever way I looked I was amazed,
for there glowed such a smile within her eyes 
I thought that with my own I had attained
my ultimate bliss, my final paradise.
Then, a joy to hear and a joy to see,
the spirit added to what first he said
words so profound I could not understand them.
Nor did he hide his thoughts from me by choice
but by necessity, for his conceptions
were set beyond our mortal limit.
And when his bow of ardent love
relaxed enough to let his speech descend
down toward the limits of our intellect,
the first thing I could understand was:
'May you be blessed, Threefold and One,
who show such favor to my seed!'
And he went on: 'That long and welcome craving,
derived from reading in the massive book
where neither black nor white is ever altered,
'you have satisfied, my son, within this light
from which I speak to you by grace of her
who dressed you out in wings for this high flight.
'You think your thoughts flow into mine through Him
who is the First, as from the number one
will radiate the five and six, if one is known.
'For that reason you do not ask me who I am
nor why I seem to you more filled with joy
than any other in this happy throng.
'And you are right, for the humble and the mighty
up here in this life gaze into the mirror
in which, before you think them, thoughts shine clear.
'But, that the sacred love, which keeps me watching
with enduring vision and makes me thirst 
with sweet desire, may be more happily fulfilled,
'let your voice resound sure, bold, and joyful,
to proclaim the will, proclaim the desire,
for which my answer is already set.'
I turned to Beatrice, who had heard
before I spoke and smiled a sign
that made my will put forth its wings.
And I began: 'Love and intelligence,
once the prime Equality appeared to you,
then became yours in equal measure,
'since that Sun that lit your way and made you warm
distributes both its heat and light so evenly
that all comparisons fall short.
'But for mortals, as you well know,
the will to act and the power to carry through
have wings that are not feathered equally,
'so that I, who am mortal, feel in myself
this inequality and thus can only offer thanks
for your paternal welcome with my heart.
'But I implore you, living topaz
set into this priceless ornament,
that you reward my longing with your name.'
'O bough of my tree, in whom I have rejoiced
even in expectation, I was your root.'
Such was the preface of his words to me.
Then: 'He from whom your house derives its name
and who for a hundred years and more
has circled the mountain on its lowest bank
'was your great-grandfather and my son.
It is most fitting that you shorten
his long and weary labor with your prayers.
'Florence, within the circle of her ancient walls
from which she still hears tierce and nones,
dwelled then in peace, temperate and chaste.
'No bracelet, no tiara did she wear,
no embroidered gown, no waistband
more striking to the eye than was its wearer.
'Nor did a new-born daughter make her father fear,
for marriage age and dowry were not yet extreme,
the one too low, the other one too high.
'No houses then stood uninhabited,
nor had Sardanapalus as yet arrived
to show what might be done behind closed doors.
'Not yet did your Uccellatoio surpass
in splendor Montemario but, exceeding
in its rise, it shall surpass it in its fall.
'I saw Bellincion Berti wear a belt of leather
and plain bone, and saw his lady step back
from the glass, her face untouched by paint.
'And I saw one of the Nerli and a del Vecchio
both content with wearing simple, unlined skins,
their ladies busy with their spindles and their flax.
'O fortunate women!  Each knew for certain
where she would be buried, nor was any yet
forsaken in her bed at France's call.
'One kept eager watch upon the cradle,
using sounds and words that first delight
fathers and mothers when they soothe their child.
'Another, while drawing the wool from its spool,
would delight her household with the tales
of Troy, Fiesole, and Rome.
'A Cianghella or a Lapo Salterello,
in those days would have caused the same surprise
as now would Cincinnatus or Cornelia.
'It was to a municipal life so peaceful
and so fair, to a citizenry so loyal,
to so sweet a place to live,
'that Mary gave me when invoked with cries
of childbirth, and in your ancient Baptistry,
I was at once Cacciaguida and a Christian.
'Moronto was my brother, as was Eliseo.
My wife came from the valley of the Po,
and from her you took the surname that you bear.
'Later, I became a partisan of Emperor Conrad,
who girded me to be his knight
once, with my faithful service, I had won his favor.
'I followed him to oppose the iniquity
of that false creed whose people, by the failure
of your shepherds, usurp your right.
'There was I freed by that foul race
from all the snares of the deceitful world --
the love of which corrupts so many souls --
and came from being martyred to this peace.'