I declare to the eternal shame and disgrace of the evil Italians who extol the vernacular of other peoples and disparage their own that their action stems from five execrable causes:
blindness in the power of discrimination: fraudulent self-justification; greed for empty glory; fault­finding prompted by envy; and, finally, baseness of mind, or pusillanimity. All of these faults draw such a large faction that few indeed are those who are free of them.
The first faction may be described as follows. Just as the sensitive part of the soul has eyes with which it can differentiate among things with respect to their external colouring, so the rational part has its eye with which it can differentiate among things with respect to their being ordered to some proper end; this is called the power of discrimination.
And just as anyone who is blind through lacking physical sight directs his steps as others guide him, be it for good or ill, so anyone who is blind through lacking the light of discrimination always directs his steps in matters of judgment according to whatever cry is raised, be it right or wrong. Consequently, whenever the person who raises the cry is himself blind both he and any other blind person who leans on him for guidance necessarily come to a bad end. As Scripture says: "When one blind man leads another, both will fall into the ditch."
A cry of this kind has long been raised against our vernacular, for reasons that will be discussed immediately below. The blind people just described, whose number is almost infinite, resting their hands on the shoulders of these liars, have fallen into the ditch of false opinion, from which they are unable to escape.
It is ordinary people above all who are bereft of possession of this light of discrimination, for, having been engaged from an early age in some gainful occupation, by dint of necessity they concentrate their mind on this to such a degree that they take no interest in anything else.
And since attaining possession of the virtues, both moral and intellectual, is not the work of a moment but must be acquired through constant practice, whereas they devote themselves to practising some professional skill and make no effort to become discriminating in matters outside that, it is impossible for them to possess discrimination.
As a result, they will often cry "Long live their death", or "Death to their life", should someone but start up the cry: this is an extremely dangerous defect intrinsic to their blindness. So Boethius regards popular esteem as worthless, recognizing that it lacks discrimination.
Such people are to be called sheep, not men: for if one sheep jumps off the edge of a thousand-foot cliff, all the rest follow after it; and if one sheep crossing a road jumps, for whatever reason, all the rest do likewise, even if they see nothing to jump over.
I myself once saw many sheep jump into a well simply because one of them, thinking perhaps that it was jumping a wall, had just done so; and this despite the fact that the shepherd, weeping and shouting, tried to block them off with his arms and body.
The second faction attacks our vernacular by proffering an evil self-justification. There are many people whose hearts are set on being regarded as masters rather than on actually being such; to avoid the opposite – that is, not being regarded as masters – they always attribute blame to the material furnished for the exercise of their skill, or to the instrument. So, for instance, a bad smith blames the iron supplied to him, and a bad lutanist his lute, with the intention of laying the blame for a bad knife or for bad music on the iron or on the lute, and shifting it from themselves.
It is no different with a number of people (a not inconsiderable number, I may add) who wish men to regard them as writers: to justify their writing nothing, or writing badly, they abuse and blame their material, that is, their own vernacular, and extol some other in which they are not required to exercise their creative skill.
Anyone wanting to know how much blame this iron really deserves need only see what works are fashioned from it by true craftsmen; then he will recognize the evil of those who think to justify themselves by blaming it.
Cicero loudly protests against such people at the beginning of one of his works, called On the End of Goods, for in his time people denigrated Latin, the Roman tongue, and extolled the Greek language for reasons similar to those used by these people to account Italian base and Provençal precious.
The third faction attacks our vernacular out of a desire for empty glory. There are many people who think that they will be more admired for treating subjects dealt with in another language, and for extolling that language, than for treating subjects dealt with in their own. It is undoubtedly no discredit to one's intelligence to master a foreign language; but it is reprehensible to exceed the truth in extolling that language in order to reap glory from such an attainment.
The fourth faction attacks our vernacular because envy prompts them to find fault with it. As was said above, envy is always found in the context of some kind of equality. People of a single language-group are equal in that they have a common vernacular; envy arises because one person cannot use it as well as another.
The envious person then finds fault not by denigrating the person who expresses himself well, denying that the person has this ability, but by denigrating the material out of which his work is fashioned, intending by disparaging his work in this way to deprive him of honour and fame. He adopts the same strategy as someone whose aim in denigrating the iron out of which a sword is made is not to denigrate the iron but the entire work of the master.
The fifth and final faction acts out of baseness of mind. A person of exaggerated self-importance always exaggerates his worth in his own heart, just as a pusillanimous person does the opposite, always regarding himself as of less worth than he really is.
And since exaggerating and underestimating are always relative to something, in comparison with which the person of exaggerated self-importance counts himself of great worth and the pusillanimous person counts himself of little worth, the result is that the person who exaggerates his own importance always holds other people to be of less worth than they really are, and the pusillanimous person always holds them to be of greater worth.
Since, further, people measure their possessions with the same measure that they apply to themselves – their possessions being effectively part of themselves – a similar process occurs in this respect: to the person who exaggerates his importance, his possessions always seem better than they really are, and those of others worse. The pusillanimous person always thinks his possessions are worth little, and those of others much; this is why many people, out of such baseness of soul, disparage their own vernacular and extol that of others.
All the people I have been describing are those loathsome and evil Italians who regard this precious vernacular as something base, which, if it is base in any respect, is so only in so far as it comes forth from the harlot lips of these adulterers, whose conduct acts as a guide for the blind people whom I mentioned when discussing the first cause above.
