Anything is deserving of severe censure which itself brings about the very defect it is intended to remedy, as, for example, would a person sent to break up a fight who, before he had broken up the first, stirred up another.
Now that my bread is purified in one respect, I must purify it in another if I am to escape such censure, for this work, which can be described as a commentary, is designed to supply what is lacking in the canzoni under discussion, and yet may itself perhaps be somewhat difficult to understand in certain parts. This difficulty is quite intentional here, arising not from inadvertence but from a desire to avoid an even greater deficiency.
How I wish that it had been the good pleasure of the Governor of the universe that the reason justifying my action had never existed! For then others would not have wronged me, nor should I unjustly have undergone punishment, a punishment as extreme as exile and poverty.
From the time when the citizens of Rome's most beautiful and famous daughter, Florence, saw fit to cast me away from her sweet bosom – where I was born and nourished until my full maturity, and where, with her gracious consent, I desire with all my heart to rest my weary mind and complete my allotted span – I have made my way through almost all the regions to which this language extends, a homeless wanderer, reduced almost to beggary, and showing against my will the wound inflicted by fortune, which is very often imputed unjustly to the one afflicted.
I have indeed been a ship lacking sail and rudder, carried to various ports and river mouths and shores by the parching wind raised by painful poverty; many have seen me in person who perhaps entertained a different image of me in virtue of a certain reputation I enjoyed, so that in their eyes not only do I myself lose in esteem, but all my works, those still to be produced no less than those already completed, are cheapened.
Why this happens – not to me only but to everyone – is something I should like to touch on briefly here. It happens because first of all one's reputation expands beyond the bounds of truth, then one's presence diminishes it beyond these bounds.
One's good reputation is originally conceived in the mind of a friend as a result of one's good conduct, and that mind first gives birth to it, for although the mind of an enemy may receive the seed, no conception takes place there.
Prompted both by an urge to add further embellishment to the gift it will make, and by love for the friend who will receive it, the mind which first gives birth to a reputation does not keep within the bounds of truth but oversteps them. When it oversteps them in order to embellish what it says, it speaks against its conscience; when it does so as deceived by love, the same does not hold true.
The second mind, receiving these words, does not rest content with the broadening effected by the first mind; it sets itself to embellish its report, this being its own distinct creation; and so, as a result of its creative urge and the deception caused by the love it in turn bears for its friend, it amplifies the reputation still further, in harmony or disharmony with conscience as in the case of the first mind. The third recipient does the same, as does the fourth, and so the reputation goes on broadening out indefinitely.
By substituting reasons opposite to those given in the above description, one can also perceive the dynamics operative in bad reputation, which is magnified in a similar way. The point is made by Virgil in the Aeneid where he says that Reputation thrives on movement, and goes from strength to strength as it travels.
Anyone who cares can, then, see perfectly clearly that the image formed in people's minds simply by reputation, be it good or bad, is always on a grander scale than is the true state of the thing imagined.
