Ladies who have understanding of love, I wish to speak with you of my lady; not that I think I can exhaust her praises, but I want to speak to unburden my mind. I say that when I consider her perfection Love makes himself felt in me so sweetly that, did I not then lose courage, I would make people in love with her by speech alone. However, I will not attempt a style so lofty as to make me faint‑hearted through fear; rather, I will speak of her excellence in a meagre style ‑compared with what she is‑ and to you, ladies and girls who know love; for it is not a thing to speak of to others.
An angel cries in the divine intellect, saying: ‘Lord, in the world there appears a marvel in act, proceeding from a soul whose splendour reaches even here on high !’ Heaven, whose only lack is the lack of her, begs her from its Lord, and every saint cries out for this favour. Pity alone defends our cause, so that God, his mind on my lady, says: ‘My loved ones, bear it patiently that your hope remains as long as I please in the place where there is one who knows he will lose her, and who in hell will declare: "O ill‑fated ones, I have seen the hope of the blessed"‘.
My lady is desired in highest heaven: and now I wish to show you something of her excellence. I say that any lady who would show she is noble should go in her company; for when she passes on her way Love casts a chill on base hearts, so that every thought in them freezes and dies; and were any such person able to stay and regard her, he would either become noble or die. And when she finds someone worthy to see her, he receives the full effect of her power; for what she then gives him turns to his good arid happiness, and renders him so humble that he forgets every injury. Again, God has given her this greater grace, that no one who has spoken with her can come to an evil end.
Love says of her: ‘How can a mortal creature be so lovely and so pure?’ Then he looks at her and swears within himself that in making her God intends to make a marvel. Her colour is pearl ‑like, in a way befitting a lady, not to excess. She is the most perfect thing that Nature can Produce: beauty is known as imaged in her. From her eyes, wherever she turns them, come fiery spirits of love that strike the eyes of whoever may be regarding her, and pass inward so that each one reaches the heart: you see Love depicted in her face, there where no one can fix his gaze.
Song, I know that when I've sent you forth you will go about speaking to many ladies. Now I charge you ‑having brought you up to be a modest young daughter of Love‑ that wherever you come you make this request: ‘Tell me where I am to go, for I have been sent to her with whose praises I am adorned.’ And if you don't wish to travel in vain, don't stop where there are base people; contrive, if you can, to show yourself only to ladies or men of courteous mind, who will lead you quickly to your destination. With her you will find Love; commend me to him, as is your duty.

Congedo.