In the first chapter of this treatise I discussed so fully the motive which inspired me to write this canzone that there is no need to discuss it again here, for it can very readily be understood in terms of the present exposition, of which I have spoken. So in this commentary I shall run over the literal account, following the divisions already given, and stop to interpret the literal sense where there is need to do so.
I say: Love, which discourses to me... in my mind. By "love" I mean the study to which I devoted myself in order to gain the love of this lady. It should be explained here that "study" may be understood in either of two ways: the study by which a person acquires habitual possession of a skill or a science; or the study in which a person puts to use the habit already acquired.
It is study in the first sense which I here call "love"; this continually inspired my mind with new and sublime thoughts about this lady, who was described above, such as that study customarily does which a person devotes to gaining a friendship, for it first reflects on noble ideas about that friendship out of desire for it.
I am referring here to that study and affection which among human beings customarily precedes the generation of friendship, when love has already been born in one person, and he desires and strives to bring about that it be born in the other, too. For, as was said above, Philosophy exists when the soul and wisdom have become friends, so that each is wholly loved by the other, in the way described above.
Nor is there any need, for the purposes of the present commentary, to discuss further this first stanza which was discussed as an introduction in the literal commentary, since from the first explanation of the stanza its second meaning can very readily be divined.
It is time, then, to go on to the second stanza, where the treatise itself begins, at the words: The sun in circling the entire world does not see. It should be explained here that just as one necessarily treats of what lies beyond the senses by reference to what is sensible, so one must treat of what lies beyond our intellect by reference to what is intelligible. Therefore, just as in the literal account I began by speaking of the physical and sensible sun, so now my discussion must be concerned with the spiritual and intelligible sun, that is, God.
No sense object in the entire universe is more worthy of acting as a symbol of God than the sun: it illuminates with sensible light first itself, then all the heavenly bodies and the bodies formed from the elements; God likewise illuminates with intellectual light first Himself, then the heavenly creatures and the other intelligible creatures.
The sun gives life to all things with its heat, and if anything consequently suffers harm this is no part of the intention of the cause, but is an incidental effect; God likewise gives life to all things by goodness, and if any consequently are evil this is no part of the divine intention, but must be simply something incidental to the unfolding of the intended effect.
For although God created the good and the evil angels, He did not create both by intention, but only the good. The wickedness of the evil angels was something that followed afterwards, foreign to God's intention – though not so foreign to His intention that He could not in Himself foresee their wickedness; but so great was God's desire to bring the spiritual creature into being that His foreknowing that some were bound to encompass their own ruin did not oblige or force Him to refrain from producing such a creature.
For it would be no credit to Nature if, knowing beforehand that some of the flowers on a certain tree were bound to fail, it did not produce any flowers on it, and on account of the barren flowers ceased producing those which would bear fruit.
I say, then, that God, who conceives all things (for His "circling" is His "conceiving") does not see anything so noble as He does when He gazes on where this being, Philosophy, exists. For although God in gazing on Himself sees all things as a single whole, He sees them all as distinct in that each thing exists distinctly in Him in the way that an effect exists in its cause.
God, therefore, sees this, the most noble of all things, existing in its purest form, in that He sees it existing in its most perfect form in Himself and in His essence. For, if we call to mind what was said above, Philosophy is a loving exercise of wisdom, which is found supremely in God – since in Him are found wisdom and love and activity at their most sublime – and which cannot exist elsewhere except in so far as it proceeds from Him.
Divine Philosophy, then, pertains to the divine essence, since in God nothing can be added to His essence; in Him Philosophy exists in its most noble form, since the divine essence is the most noble; and it is united to Him in the most perfect and true way, as if by eternal marriage. Philosophy is united to the other intelligences in a lesser way, rather like a mistress with whom no lover attains complete joy, but contents his longing with the sight of her.
That is why it can be said that God does not see, that is, does not conceive, anything so noble as this lady; I speak of God's "seeing anything" in the sense explained above: He sees and distinguishes things other than Himself in seeing Himself as the cause of all. O most noble and most excellent heart which is intent upon the spouse of the Emperor of the heavens – and not the spouse only, but sister and daughter best beloved!
