Love, as we know from the consensus of the finest minds who treat of its meaning, and from what our own experience continually tells us, is what joins and unites the lover with his beloved. Hence Pythagoras' remark: "Friendship binds many into one."
And since things that are united naturally communicate their qualities to each other, to such an extent that sometimes one takes on completely the nature of the other, we find that the feelings of the person loved become part of the person who loves, so that the love felt by one is communicated to the other; similarly with hate, desire and all other feelings. That is why the friends of one are loved by the other, and his enemies hated. As the Greek proverb has it: "True friends share everything."
When I, then, became the friend of this lady (as described in the accurate account given above), I began to love and hate in accordance with her love and hate. I began, therefore, to love those who followed truth, and to hate those who followed error and falsehood, as she does.
However, since everything considered in itself deserves to be loved, and nothing deserves to be hated except in so far as it is distorted by evil, it is reasonable and just to hate what is evil in things, but not the things themselves, and to strive to eliminate such evil. No one is more intent on this goal (of eliminating the evil in things, which is what is hateful in them) than my most excellent lady, for she is the full perfection of reason, and the source of all justice.
I, who follow her in action as well as in feeling to the best of my ability, criticized and inveighed against errors widely held among mankind, in order to discredit and bring into disrepute not those who were in error, but the errors themselves. My aim in so doing was to make the errors offensive, and thereby to eliminate them from those who, on their account, had become hateful to me.
Among these errors there was one which I censured above all, since it is not only harmful to those who hold it, but causes hurt and injury even to those who censure it.
This is the error concerning human excellence, considered in so far as it is sown in us by nature, and whose proper name is "nobility". On account of people's evil conduct and poor knowledge, error on this matter was so entrenched that almost everyone had been led to hold a false opinion about it. False opinion gave rise to false judgments, and false judgments to unjust attitudes of respect and contempt. As a result, good people were despised as base, while evil people were honoured and exalted. This drove the world's affairs into the direst confusion, as is evident to anyone with a discerning eye for the possible consequences of such a view.
Now it happened that my lady ceased to reveal herself to me with quite her accustomed sweetness, particularly as regards my seeking to know whether the prime matter of the elements was an object of God's knowledge. Consequently, I refrained for a time from attempting to see her, and, since I now passed my time without her company, I gave my attention to mankind's error on the above subject.
Since I wished to avoid idleness, the chief enemy of this lady, and to extirpate this error which robs her of so many friends, I decided to cry out to those who were taking a false route, so that they would direct their steps along the right path. I began to compose a canzone, of which the opening line is: I must abandon the sweet poems of love that have been my thoughts' constant quest. It is my intention in this canzone to lead people back to the right road regarding proper recognition of true nobility, as will be evident from a reading of the text on which I am about to comment.
Since it was the aim of this canzone to bring a sorely needed remedy, it was inappropriate to use figurative speech; what was called for was a quick way of administering this medicine, so that people would soon recover their health, for when that began to suffer then a truly horrible death speedily followed.
I shall have no need, then, in commenting on this canzone, to unveil any allegory, but only to explain the literal meaning of the text. The explanation given in the preceding discussion regarding the identity of my lady still obtains: she is that light full of wonderful power, Philosophy, whose rays cause the flowers to bloom once again and to bear fruit in true human nobility. It is the aim of the canzone set out above to explore this theme fully.
