With this bread now purged of incidental blemishes, I still have to justify the presence of one that is intrinsic to it, namely, its being written in the vernacular and not in Latin, or, in metaphorical terms, its being made of barley and not of wheat.
To put it briefly, this is justified by three reasons that moved me to choose the former rather than the latter: the first comes from a desire to avoid inversion of the proper order; the second from whole-heartedness in the exercise of liberality; the third from the natural love one has for one's native language.
In what follows I intend to give a detailed explanation of these reasons, dealing with each in turn, in order to acquit myself of any censure that might be based on the reason given.
What most graces human activity and wins it admiration, and what most directly leads it to a successful end, is a person's possession of those dispositions which are ordered to the end in view, as, for instance, boldness of spirit and strength of body are ordered to the end sought by chivalry.
So anyone who is ordered to someone's service must possess those dispositions which are ordered to that end, namely, subjection, close knowledge and obedience; without these he is ill-suited to perform good service, for if he is not subject in every respect, he always finds his service difficult and wearisome, and rarely perseveres in it; and if he does not closely know his master's needs and is not obedient to him, he will only ever serve as he thinks right and as he wishes, which is rather the service of a friend than of a servant.
To avoid any such inversion of the proper order, therefore, this commentary, which is meant to act as servant to the canzoni given below, must be subject to them in every respect, must closely know their master's needs, and must be obedient to him.
Since the canzoni are written in the vernacular, the commentary would lack these dispositions entirely if it were written in Latin and not in the vernacular, as I shall now explain. In the first place, it would have been not the subject of the canzoni but their sovereign by reason of nobility, of virtue and of beauty. By reason of nobility, because Latin has a permanent form and is not subject to change, whereas the vernacular is unstable and is subject to change.
Consequently, we find in the ancient Latin comedies and tragedies, which cannot undergo change, a form of language identical with that used today; this cannot be said of the vernacular, which is refashioned in accordance with changes in taste.
And so we find, if we examine the matter carefully, that in the cities of Italy in the course of the last fifty years many words have become extinct, been born or undergone variation; and if a short space of time has brought such change, a longer one will have done so all the more. Indeed I am quite confident that if people who departed this life a thousand years ago were to return to their native cities, they would think them occupied by a foreign race, so much does today's language differ from theirs.
(This topic will be pursued more fully elsewhere, in a little work I intend to write, God willing, on Eloquence in the Vernacular.)
Furthermore, Latin would be not their subject but their sovereign by reason of virtue. A thing is virtuous with respect to the nature it possesses when it performs the operation to which it is ordered; the better it performs this, the more virtuous it is. So we call a human being virtuous who lives a life of contemplation or of action, to which he is ordered by nature; we apply the same term to a horse that runs with speed and stamina, which is the action to which it is ordered; likewise we call a sword virtuous which easily cuts through hard things, which is the action to which it is ordered.
Similarly with speech: it is ordered to giving expression to the ideas conceived by the human mind; so it is virtuous when it performs that function, and the more fully it does so, the more virtuous it is. Consequently, since our mind conceives many ideas which Latin can express but the vernacular cannot, as anyone with command of both languages can testify, Latin is more virtuous than the vernacular.
Moreover, Latin would be not their subject but their sovereign by reason of beauty. Something is said to be beautiful when its parts are in proper accord with each other, because the harmony among them is a source of pleasure for us. So someone is considered beautiful when his bodily members are in proper accord with each other; we call a song beautiful when its sounds accord with each other in conformity with the dictates of art.
That language, then, is more beautiful in which the words more properly accord with each other; and they more properly accord with each other in Latin than in the vernacular, since the vernacular is shaped by usage, and Latin by art. It must be granted, therefore, that Latin is more beautiful, more virtuous and more noble.
So my main point has been established, that a commentary in Latin would have been not the subject of the canzoni but their sovereign.
