When the two offspring of Latona,
one covered by the Ram, one by the Scales,
together make a belt of the horizon
for the moment that the zenith
holds them balanced, until each of them,
in changing hemispheres, unbalances that belt,
for just that long, her face lit by a smile,
Beatrice was silent, staring intently
at the point that overcame me.
Then she began: 'I tell, I do not ask,
what you would like to hear.  For I have seen it there
where every ubi and every quando has its center.
'Not to increase His store of goodness,
a thing impossible, but that His splendor,
shining back, might say Subsisto,
'in His eternity, beyond time, beyond
any other limit, as it pleased Him,
in these new loves, Eternal Love unfolded.
'Nor, before then, did He rest in torpor,
for until God moved upon these waters
there existed no "before," there was no "after."
'Form and matter, conjoined and separate,
came into being without defect,
shot like three arrows from a three-stringed bow.
'And, as a ray shines right through glass, amber,
or crystal, so that between its presence
and its shining there is no lapse of time,
'just so did the threefold creation flash --
with no intervals in its beginning --
from its Lord into being, all at once.
'With it, order was created and ordained
for the angels, and these were the summit
of the universe, for in them God produced pure act.
'Pure potential held the lowest place.
Between them, potential and act were held together
by such a bond as may not be unbound.
'Jerome's writing tells you all the angels
were created many centuries before
the rest of the universe came into being.
'Yet the scribes of the Holy Ghost declare
the truth on many pages,
as you shall find on searching with some care.
'And even reason sees it, in some measure,
for it would not grant that the movers of the heavens
should remain so long without becoming perfect.
'Now you know both where and when these loving spirits
were created, and you know how, as well.
And thus three flames of your desire have been quenched.
'Then, sooner than one might count to twenty,
one band of angels had disturbed
the lowest of your elements.
'The other band remained and gave itself
with such abandon to this task, which you behold,
that never does it cease its circling motion.
'The cause accounting for the fall
was the accursèd pride of him you saw
crushed beneath the weight of all the world.
'These whom you observe here all were humble,
acknowledging the Goodness that had made them fit
to be endowed with an intelligence so vast.
'Thus their vision was exalted
by illuminating grace, along with their own merit,
so that theirs is a will both whole and steadfast.
'And I would not have you doubt, but rather be assured,
that there is merit in receiving grace
in measure as the heart inclines to it.
'Henceforth, if you have understood my words,
you may examine anything you like
in this assembly without need of aid.
'But since in schools on earth you still are taught
that the angelic nature is possessed
of understanding, memory, and will,
'I will continue, so that you clearly see
how truth is made unclear down there
by such equivocation in its teaching.
'These angelic beings, since they first rejoiced
in the face of God, from which nothing may be hidden,
have never turned their eyes away from it,
'so that their sight is never interrupted
by some new object.  And thus they have no need
to search the past for some forgotten construct.
'Thus down there men are dreaming while they wake,
believing that they speak the truth.  And those
who don't believe so share the greater guilt and shame.
'Down there, when you philosophize, you fail
to follow one true path, so does the love of show
preoccupy your mind and carry you away,
'and even this is tolerated here
with less wrath than when holy Scripture
is neglected or its doctrines are mistaught.
'There is no thought among you of the blood it costs
to sow the world with it, or how acceptable he is
who humbly makes his way to it.
'Each strives to gain attention by inventing new ideas,
expounded by the preachers at some length --
but the Gospel remains silent.
'One says that at Christ's passion the moon turned back
and interposed itself in such a way
the sun's light did not reach below.
'He lies, for the light chose to hide itself.
And therefore Spaniards and Indians,
as well as Jews, could all see that eclipse take place.
'Florence has not as many named Lapo and Bindo
as it has tales like these that are proclaimed
from the pulpit, here and there, throughout the year,
'so that the ignorant flocks return from feeding
fed on wind.  And that they fail
to see their loss does not excuse them.
'Christ did not say to His first congregation:
"Go preach idle nonsense to the world,"
but gave to them a sound foundation.
'And that alone resounded from their lips,
so that, in their warfare to ignite the faith,
they used the Gospel as their shield and lance.
'Now preachers ply their trade with buffoonery and jokes,
their cowls inflating if they get a laugh,
and the people ask for nothing  more.
'But such a bird nests in their hoods
that, if the people saw it, they would see
the kind of pardoning to which they give their trust.
'Because of these such foolishness has grown on earth
that, with no warrant vouching for its truth,
they still would flock to any promise.
'On this Saint Anthony fattens his swine,
along with many others who are still more swinish,
repaying them with unstamped coin.
'But, since we have digressed enough,
now turn your eyes to the true road again,
that the way may be made shorter -- and the time.
'The angelic host mounts by degrees
to such high numbers, no mortal speech or thought
could ever count so far,
'and, if you consider what Daniel reveals,
you shall see that in his many thousands
a finite number stays concealed.
'The Primal Light that irradiates them all
is received by them in just as many ways
as there are splendors joined with It.
'Therefore, since affection follows
the act of conceiving, love's sweetness glows
with differing radiance, more brightly or subdued.
'See now the height and breadth of the Eternal Worth,
one light, which shines dispersed among
so many mirrors yet remains
in Itself one, just as It was before.'