At the beginning of every properly arranged banquet it is customary for the servants to take the bread set out and purify it of any blemishes. Since I play their role with respect to the present writing, my first concern regarding this exposition – which has the place of bread in what I am providing – is to clear it of two blemishes.
One is that it seems improper for anyone to speak about himself; the other is that it seems to be unreasonable to speak too profoundly when giving an exposition.
With the knife of my judgment I am able to purify the commentary both of what is improper and what is unreasonable in the following way. The established canons of rhetoric forbid anyone to speak of himself except for some compelling reason. The ground of this prohibition is that one cannot speak of someone without either praising or blaming him, and to let either of these pass one's lips in regard to oneself would be to show a want of urbanity.
In answer to a question that suggests itself here, I declare that blaming oneself is worse than praising oneself, though both are to be avoided. The reason is that something which of its very nature deserves blame is more reprehensible than something which does so because of some quality incidental to it.
To disparage oneself is of its very nature blameworthy, since one ought to point out a friend's shortcomings to him alone; and no one has a friend closer than his own self. Consequently, it is only in the privacy of one's own thoughts that one ought to admonish oneself and lament one's faults, never publicly.
Furthermore, one is not normally criticized for not being able, or for not knowing how, to conduct oneself as one should, but one always is for not willing to do so, for it is with respect to our willing or not willing to do something that we are judged to be evil or good. So anyone who blames himself testifies that he himself is aware of his own fault; he testifies that he himself is lacking in goodness. Of its very nature, then, voicing blame of oneself is something one ought to avoid.
Praising oneself is to be shunned as evil because of a quality incidental to it, in so far as such praise cannot be voiced without being criticism rather than praise. The words spoken are praise on the surface, but criticism to anyone who searches their insides, for the purpose of speech is to make evident something that others do not know. So whoever praises himself makes it evident that he thinks he is not regarded as good, a position he will find himself in only if he has a bad conscience, which he reveals in praising himself; and by revealing this he blames himself.
Moreover, self-praise and self-blame are to be shunned for a reason that applies equally to both, namely, that they involve giving false witness, for no one of us is capable of measuring his own worth truly and justly, so much does self-love deceive us.
As a result, everyone in judging himself employs the measures used by a cheating merchant, who has one measure for buying and another for selling; everyone assesses his evil conduct using a large measure and his good conduct using a small one, so that the number and quantity and weight of his good conduct seem greater to him than they would had he tested them using a just measure, and those of his evil conduct seem less.
In speaking in praise or dispraise of himself a person will, therefore, either give a false description of an event, or he will attribute a false significance to it; in either case falsehood will be present.
Since to consent to something is to acknowledge its truth, it follows that for anyone to praise or blame someone to his face is to act basely towards him, for the person so judged can neither consent to, nor deny, what is said without incurring the guilt of praising or blaming himself. One must, of course, make exception in this regard when it is one's place to correct someone: this cannot be done without decrying the fault one intends to correct. The same applies when it is one's place to honour and extol someone: this cannot be done without speaking of virtuous deeds and of honours virtuously acquired.
However, to go back to the main theme, and expand on something suggested above, I maintain that to speak of oneself is permitted when there are compelling reasons, of which two in particular stand out.
The first obtains when to talk about oneself is the only way that some grave disgrace or danger can be obviated; it is then permissible because when one is faced with two such courses of action to take the less evil amounts to taking a good one. It was necessity of this kind that moved Boethius to speak of himself: since no one else rose to his defence, he sought, under the pretext of finding consolation, to defend himself against the everlasting disgrace of his exile by showing that it had been unjust.
The second obtains when a person's speaking about himself is so instructive as to be of the greatest help to others. This was Augustine's motive for speaking about himself in his Confessions, his for in the development of his life, which progressed from not good to good, from good to better, and from better to best, he gives us example and instruction which no account by a mere witness, however faithful, could have supplied.
If each of these reasons justifies my conduct, the bread made from my grain may be regarded as fully purified of its first blemish. I am moved to speak by both the fear of disgrace and the desire to give instruction which no one else is in a position to give.
I fear the disgrace of being thought to have given myself over to a passion so great that it ruled my life, which is how the canzoni mentioned above are understood. This disgrace is entirely removed by what I say of myself here, for this shows that my actions have been ruled not by passion but by virtue.
I also intend to make clear the true meaning of those canzoni, which no one can know unless I explain what it is, because it is hidden under allegorical imagery. My doing this will bring not only delight pleasing to the ear but also suitable instruction concerning the use of this method both in expressing oneself and in interpreting the writings of others.
