In that season of the youthful year

when the sun cools his locks beneath Aquarius

and the dark already nears but half the day,

and when the hoarfrost copies out upon the fields

the very image of her snowy sister -- 

although her pen-point is not sharp for long -- 

the peasant, short of fodder, rises,

looks out, and sees the countryside

turned white, at which he slaps his thigh,

goes back indoors, grumbling here and there

like a wretch who knows not what to do,

then goes outside again and is restored to hope,

seeing that the world has changed its face

in that brief time, he now picks up his crook

and drives his sheep to pasture.

Thus the master caused me to lose heart

when I saw how troubled was his brow

and just as quickly came the poultice to the wound,

for no sooner had we reached the broken bridge

than he turned to me with that gentle glance

I first saw at the mountain's foot.

He looked with care upon the ruin,

took thought, chose a plan of action,

then opened out his arms and took me in them.

And like one who reckons as he works,

always planning beforehand what comes next,

thus, while raising me to a boulder's top,

he searched for yet another crag

and said: 'Take hold of that one next

but test to see if it will bear your weight.'

This was no climb for people wearing leaden cloaks.

Though he was weightless and I was being pushed,

how hard a climb it was from one crag to the other!

Were it not that on this side of the dike

the slope was shorter -- I cannot speak for him -- 

I would have given up.

But since all Malebolge inclines

down to the mouth of the lowest pit,

it follows that each valley is constructed

with one side higher than the other.

At last we made it to the point

where the outermost stone had broken off.

And there I felt my lungs so sucked of breath

that I could go no farther,

but sat down as quickly as I could.

'Now must you cast off sloth,' my master said.

'Sitting on feather cushions or stretched out

under comforters, no one comes to fame.

'Without fame, he who spends his time on earth

leaves only such a mark upon the world

as smoke does on the air or foam on water.

'Get to your feet!  Conquer this laboring breath

with strength of mind, which wins the battle

if not dragged down by body's weight.

'There is a longer stair that must be climbed.

It's not enough to leave these souls behind.

If you take my meaning, let it be of use.'

At that I rose, pretending to more breath

than I had in me, and said:

'Go on then, for I am strong and resolute.'

We labored up a ridge,

rugged, narrow, difficult,

and steeper far than was the last.

Not to seem so spent, I talked as I climbed up.

Then, from the next ditch, came a voice

that seemed unfit for forming words.

I could not make out what it said,

though I was at the crown that arches over,

but he who spoke seemed to be moving.

Hard as I strained to see, it was too dark

for living eyes to plumb the depths.

And so I said: 'Master, take your way

'to the next encircling bank where we can leave

this bridge.  From here I make out nothing

with my ears nor see a thing down there.'

'I give no other answer than to take you,'

he said, 'for a just request

should be followed by the act, in silence.'

We left the bridge at the abutment

where it comes to rest on that eighth bank.

From there the contents of the ditch came into view.

In it I saw a dreadful swarm of serpents,

of so strange a kind that even now

when I remember them it chills my blood.

Let Libya with all her sands no longer boast,

for though she fosters chelydri, jaculi,

phareae, cenchres, and amphisbaena,

she never reared so many venomous pests,

nor so appalling -- not with all of Ethiopia

and the lands that lie along the Red Sea coast.

Amid this fearsome and most awful plenty,

people, naked and in terror, were running

without hope of refuge or of heliotrope.

Their hands were tied behind their backs with snakes

that thrust their heads and tails between the legs

and joined, knotting themselves in front.

And behold, one of these souls was near our ridge

when a serpent launched and pierced him through

right where the neck and shoulders join.

Never has 'o' nor even 'i' been writ so quick

as he caught fire and burned, turned,

in the very act of falling, into ashes.

And, as he lay unmade upon the ground,

the dust gathered itself of its own accord

and suddenly he was himself again.

Just, as is attested by great sages,

the phoenix perishes and is reborn

when it approaches its five-hundredth year -- 

lifelong it feeds on neither grain nor grasses,

but thrives on drops of frankincense and cardamom,

while nard and myrrh make up its winding sheet -- 

and just as one who faints, and knows not why -- 

whether possessed by devils that pull him down

or seized by the sickness that causes men to fall -- 

rises to his feet, and gazes round,

wholly bewildered by the breathless anguish

he has undergone, and as he looks, he sighs,

such did that sinner seem when he had risen.

O how stern it is, the power of God,

hurling such blows as it takes vengeance!

When my leader asked him who he was:

'From Tuscany I rained down,' was his answer,

'not long ago, into this savage gorge.

'I loved the life of beasts and not of men,

just like the mule I was.  I am Vanni Fucci,

animal.  Pistoia was my fitting den.'

And I to my leader: 'Tell him not to slip away,

then ask what sin has thrust him to this depth,

for I knew him as a man of blood and rages.'

And the sinner, listening, did not dissemble,

but set his mind and eyes on me,

then colored with a wrathful shame

and said: 'For you to catch me

in this misery pains me more

than when I was taken from the other life.

'I can't refuse to answer what you ask.

I am thrust so far below because I stole

its lovely ornaments from the sacristy

'and the blame was wrongly laid upon another.

But, so you take no joy in seeing me this low,

if ever you escape from these dark regions,

'open your ears to my prophecy and hear:

First, Pistoia strips herself of Blacks,

then Florence changes families and fashions.

'Next Mars draws up a bolt from Val di Magra,

engulfed by torn and threatening clouds,

and, with violent and stinging storms,

'on Campo Piceno the battle shall be joined.

The headlong bolt shall rend the clouds,

striking and wounding every White.

And this I have told that it may make you grieve.'

