To return to the main theme, I affirm that human life is divided into four stages. The first is called youth, that is, "the growth of life". The second is called maturity (gioventute), that is, "the stage which can be of help (giovare)", in other words, which can bring perfection; the name indicates, therefore, that this is the stage at which perfection is achieved, since no one can give what he does not possess. The third is called "old age", and the fourth "extreme old age". This by way of recapitulation.
As regards the first stage, there is unanimous agreement among the learned that it lasts up to the twenty‑fifth year. Since until that time our soul directs its energies to bringing about physical growth and beauty, and our body, consequently, undergoes many significant changes, our rational part cannot perfectly exercise its power of discrimination. That is why the Law stipulates that any person who has not reached the age of 25 cannot carry out certain actions without a guardian of mature years.
As regards the second stage, which is without doubt the climax of our life, its exact duration is a matter of dispute. However, I shall leave aside what the philosophers and doctors have written on this subject, and give the view to which my own reflections have led me. I hold that in the majority of cases, which constitutes the only possible and appropriate basis for making a judgment about what is natural, this stage lasts for 20 years. Accepting that the zenith of the arc of our life is 35, my reason for the figure 20 is that in this stage of life the ascent and descent must be of equal length. This, in turn, is based on the fact that this particular ascent and descent come close to being a steady maintenance of height by the arc, during which we perceive only a slight curvature.
This leaves us with the conclusion that maturity comes to an end at 45. Old age corresponds to youth. We know that youth, the period of movement upward towards maturity, lasts for 25 years; so, too, does old age, the period of downward movement succeeding maturity. Old age, then, ends at 70.
Moreover, since youth does not begin at the first moment of life (understanding "life" as it was described above) but about eight months thereafter; and since, further, our nature actively promotes the upward movement, whereas it acts as a bridle during the downward, because our natural heat is diminished and has little strength, and our moisture becomes more dense – through a change in its quality, not in its quantity – so that it is less readily susceptible of being vaporized and consumed, there remains after old age a stage of life lasting about ten years, more or less. This we call extreme old age.
Plato is a good case in point: he lived until he was 81, and we may be confident from his own achievement and from what Socrates divined of him on the basis of his appearance when he first met him, that he was endowed with an outstandingly fine nature. And I believe if Christ had not been crucified, and had lived out the span of years for which nature had fitted him, it would have been in his eighty-first year that he would have exchanged the mortal body for the eternal.
As was noted above, there is no doubt that these stages can be of longer or shorter duration, depending on our constitution and the particular composition of the elements in us. It seems to me, nonetheless, that the proportion in length described above among the different stages obtains in everyone's case, the actual length of each stage varying according to the total life-span of the individual. In these various stages the nobility of which I have been speaking reveals its presence in the different effects it produces in the ennobled soul. It is the aim of the part of the text we are discussing to show this in detail.
It should be explained here that our nature, when it is good and upright, develops in us by following a fitting sequence (just as we observe the nature of plants developing in them), and so different customs and different kinds of behaviour are fitting at one stage which are not so at another. In these the ennobled soul develops in an ordered way guided by a single criterion: it brings its activities into play at the times and stages suited to producing its final fruit.
Various accounts of this ongoing development of nature in these stages have been given: Virgil treats it figuratively in the Aeneid; Aegidius the Hermit comments on it in the first part of The Regimen of Princes; Cicero touches on it in On the Offices. I leave all these aside, and, relying simply on what reason itself can observe, I declare that the first of these stages is the gateway and path by which we enter into the life of excellence befitting us as human beings.
Certain things are necessary for this entry to be successfully accomplished, and these the goodness of nature, which never fails to supply what is necessary, gives us, acting in us as we, see it do in the vine: to the vine nature gives leaves to protect the fruit, and tendrils to offset and overcome its weakness, enabling it to bear the weight of its fruit.
The goodness of nature, therefore, gives this stage four things required for entry to the city where the life of excellence is enjoyed: obedience, gentleness, bashfulness and physical beauty – as the text indicates in the opening section of the present part.
It should be explained here that just as a stranger to a city would not know how to keep to the roads unless he received guidance from someone familiar with them, so the young person who enters the wood of this life with its maze of false paths would not be able to keep to the right one if it were not pointed out to him by his elders. However, their showing it to him would be quite useless if he were not obedient to their commands; that is why obedience has always been necessary for this stage.
The question may well be raised: is the term "obedient" applicable to a person who assents to evil commands as well as to one who assents to those which are good? My reply is that to act in that way would not be obedience but transgression, for if the king commands one course of action, and a servant another, the servant is not to be obeyed, for that would be to disobey the king, and therefore to commit a transgression.
That is why Solomon, when he sets out to instruct his son, begins with this command: "My child, pay attention to the teaching of your father." He immediately goes on to warn him against evil advice and instruction from others: "May sinners never induce you, by flattery or enticement, to journey through life with them." Consequently, just as every child clings to his mother's breast as soon as he is born, so ought he to turn to his father for guidance as soon as the light of reason begins to dawn, and the father ought to offer him instruction.
Furthermore, the father ought to ensure that the example of his conduct does not run counter to his words of instruction, for experience tells us that every child is spontaneously influenced more by the example of his father than that of others. That is why the Law, providing for this point, declares, indeed commands, that the bearing of any father should always be seen by his children to be holy and honourable. It is clear, then, that obedience has always been necessary at this period of life.
This, too, lies behind Solomon's words in Proverbs that whoever humbly and obediently respects the person who corrects him, and the corrective criticism given, "will be glorious". Should anyone put the false objection: "What is cited here applies only to a person's father and not to anyone else", my reply is that all obedience owed to others derives from that owed to the father.
This is implied in Paul's words to the Colossians: "Little children, obey your father in all things, for such is the will of God." If the father is no longer living, all obedience must derive from that owed to whoever is appointed in the father's will to act in his place; if the father dies intestate, it must derive from the obedience owed to the one to whom the Law assigns the role of guardianship.
After the father, those teachers and older people must be obeyed to whose care the adolescent has been committed in compliance with some indication given by the father or by whoever acts in his stead. However, since the useful digressions contained in this chapter have drawn it out, it would be better to discuss the other topics in a new chapter.
