To understand what is meant by the third heaven the reader must first understand what I mean by the word "heaven" itself; he will then understand how and why it was necessary to make reference to this third heaven.
By "heaven" I mean knowledge, and by "heavens" the various sciences, and I do so on the basis both of three principal similarities between the heavens and the sciences, and of the order and number found in each group which are clearly alike, as will be seen when I come to discuss the other word "third".
The first similarity is that each member of both groups revolves around something immobile within it: each moving heaven revolves around its centre, which is not itself affected by that movement; likewise each science turns around its subject without affecting the subject itself, since every science takes as given the existence of its own subject and does not seek to prove it.
The second similarity is that both groups shed light, for every heaven sheds light on things that can be perceived by the eyes, and similarly every science sheds light on the things that can be perceived by the intellect.
The third similarity is that they bring about perfection in things disposed to receive it. All philosophers agree that the heavens are the causes which bring about the first perfection, that is, the generation of substances, even though they give different accounts of how this effect is produced by them. (Some say that it is brought about by the beings which move the heavens; this is the opinion of Plato, Avicenna and Algazel. Others say that it is brought about by the stars themselves, particularly in the case of human souls; this is the opinion of Socrates, and of Plato and Dionysius the Academic. Others again say that it is brought about by a heavenly power operative in the natural heat of the seed; this is the opinion of Aristotle and the other Peripatetics.)
Likewise, the various sciences are what bring about the second perfection in us: through mastery of them we can contemplate the truth, this being our highest perfection, as Aristotle indicates in the Ethics, when he says that the truth is the good which fulfils the intellect. On account of these similarities, and many others, the term "heaven" may be used to signify knowledge.
It is time to see why it was appropriate to speak of the third heaven. To grasp this it is necessary to consider a correspondence obtaining between the order of the heavens and that of the sciences. As has been indicated, then, the seven heavens nearest to us are those which contain planets; above these come two heavens which also are in motion, and above all these one which is at rest.
To the first seven heavens correspond the seven sciences making up the Trivium and Quadrivium: Grammar, Dialectic, Rhetoric, Arithmetic, Music, Geometry and Astronomy. To the eighth sphere (the Sphere of the Stars) corresponds natural science, called Physics, and the first science, called Metaphysics; to the ninth sphere corresponds moral science: and to the heaven at rest corresponds the divine science, called Theology. The grounds on which these assertions are made must now briefly be given.
I declare that the heaven of the Moon is like Grammar, because it has two properties on whose account it may be compared to that science. Anyone who carefully observes the Moon notes that there are two features characteristic of it, which do not appear in any of the other stars: the first is the presence in it of shadow, which is nothing other than the occurrence of low density in the body of this star, on which the sun's rays cannot rest and be reflected, as they are by its other parts; the second is the variation in its luminosity, for it shines on different sides at different times, depending on how the sun is facing it.
Grammar has both these properties, for, on account of the quality of infinity it possesses, the rays of reason cannot come to rest on it, particularly in the realm of vocabulary; and it shines from different places at different times, in that certain words, certain declensions and certain constructions are presently in use which previously were not, and many were previously in use which will again be so, as Horace remarks at the beginning of the Poetics, when he says: "Many words will rise to new life which once fell from favour."
The heaven of Mercury may be compared to Dialectic on account of two properties, because Mercury is the smallest star in the heavens, for the length of its diameter is no more than 232 miles, according to Alfraganus, who asserts that it is one twenty-eighth the diameter of the earth, which is 6,500 miles; the second property is that it pursues its course more veiled by the rays of the sun than any other star.
These two properties are found in Dialectic, too, for Dialectic is a more compact body of knowledge than any other science, being set out in its entirety in a text no larger than the Old Art and the New Art; it pursues its course more veiled than any other science, in that it proceeds by more subtle and hypothetical arguments than any other.
The heaven of Venus may be compared to Rhetoric on account of two properties: the first is the clarity in its appearance, which is sweeter to behold than that of any other star; the second is its appearing in the morning at one period and in the evening at another.
These two properties are found in Rhetoric, too, for Rhetoric is sweeter than all the other sciences, since sweetness is its principal concern; it appears in the morning when the rhetorician speaks to an audience directly before him, and it appears in the evening, that is, from behind, when the rhetorician speaks at one remove, via the written word.
The heaven of the Sun may be compared to Arithmetic on account of two properties: the first is that it is from the Sun's light that all the other stars draw theirs; the other is that the eye cannot gaze on it.
These two properties are found in Arithmetic, too, for by its light if all the sciences are illuminated, since all of their subjects are to some extent studied from a numerical perspective, and progress in the study of these subjects is always made with the help of numbers.
The subject of natural science, for instance, is mobile objects, which by definition have the property of spatial extension, and this by definition has the property of infinity; further, natural science concentrates primarily on study of the fundamental constitutive principles of natural things, of which there are three, namely, matter, privation and form, which are also characterized by number.
It is not only the ensemble of these principles that is characterized by number, but each of them individually, as careful reflection reveals; that is why Pythagoras (as reported by Aristotle) held that the fundamental principles of natural things are the even and the odd, since he thought that all things actually consisted of number.
The second property of the Sun is also found in number, whose science is Arithmetic: the eye of the intellect cannot gaze on this, because number, considered in its intrinsic nature, is infinite, and this we human beings cannot directly apprehend.
The heaven of Mars may be compared to Music on account of two properties: the first is that its relationship to the other moving heavens is the most beautiful, for if we count these beginning at either the lowest or the highest, the heaven of Mars comes fifth, and so midway between all the others, that is midway between the first two, the second two, the third two and the fourth two.
The second property is that, as Ptolemy says in the Tetrabiblos, this heaven of Mars dries things and burns them, because its heat is like that of fire; for this reason it has the colour of something on fire, deeper and lighter at various times depending on the density or rarity of the vapours which follow it, which often spontaneously burst into flames, as is demonstrated in the Meteorics.
Consequently, Albumasar says that the flaring of these vapours signals the death of kings and the transfer of royal authority, since these effects are under the dominion of Mars: this explains why Seneca says that at the time of the Emperor Augustus' death he saw a ball of fire in the sky, and why, too, in Florence, at the onset of its destruction, there was seen in the air, in the form of a cross, a great quantity of these vapours which follow the star of Mars.
These two properties are found in Music, too, for Music is entirely a matter of relationships, as is evident in speech, in respect of poetry, and in songs, for the sweetness of the harmony created by any one of these works is in proportion to the beauty of the relationship within it; it is in this science that we principally find the beauty specific to relationship, for relationship is its principal concern.
Furthermore, Music draws to itself the various spirits in a person (which may be said to consist mainly of vapours of the heart) to the extent that they almost cease to carry out any of their functions: to such a degree does the soul form a single entity when it hears music, that the power in all the spirits rushes, as it were, to the sensitive spirit, which receives the sound.
The heaven of Jupiter may be compared to Geometry on account of two properties: the first is that it moves between two heavens antithetical to its admirable temperateness, those of Mars and Saturn; so Ptolemy says, in the work cited, that Jupiter is a star of temperate quality, midway between the cold of Saturn and the heat of Mars. The second property is that it alone among the stars is white in appearance, as if covered in silver. These features are also found in the science of Geometry.
Geometry moves between two things antithetical to it, the point and the circle: as Euclid says, the point is the primary element in Geometry, and, as he, also indicates, the circle is its most perfect figure, and must, therefore, be considered its end.
So Geometry moves between the point and the circle as between its beginning and its end; and both of these are antithetical to the certainty characteristic of this science, for the point cannot be measured at all, since it cannot be divided, and the circle cannot be measured precisely, since, being curved, it cannot be perfectly squared. Furthermore, Geometry is of the purest white in that it is free of any taint of error, and utterly certain both in itself and its ancillary science, called Perspective.
The heaven of Saturn has two properties on account of which it may be compared to Astronomy: the first is the slowness with which it moves through the 12 signs, for, as the astronomers inform us, the time taken by its revolution is more than 29 years; the second is that it is high above all the other planets.
Both of these properties are found in Astronomy, too, for a very long period is spent in completing its revolution, that is, in acquiring competence in it, both on account of its ancillary disciplines, which are more numerous than those of any of the sciences mentioned above, and on account of the experience needed before one can make sound judgments in it.
Moreover, this is by far the highest of these sciences, since, as Aristotle says at the beginning of On the Soul, a science is exalted in nobility in accordance with the nobility of its subject and the certainty of which it allows; and to a greater extent than any of those mentioned above, this science is noble and high on account of its high and noble subject, the movement of the heavens; it is, too, high and noble on account of the certainty of which it allows, which is absolutely free of fault, being generated by an object which is quite perfect in nature and regular in movement. If anyone thinks he detects a fault in this certainty, this is not to be ascribed to the certainty itself; as Ptolemy remarks, the fault arises rather from our carelessness, and it is to this that it must be imputed.
