Having demonstrated that a Latin commentary would not have been a servant with close knowledge of its master, I shall now show how it would not have been an obedient servant.
A person is obedient if he possesses the admirable disposition called obedience.
True obedience is present only when three conditions obtain: the person's activity must be sweet, and not bitter; it must be done entirely as a result of a command, and not spontaneously; it must be done with measure, and not in an unmeasured way. It would have been impossible for a Latin commentary to have these three qualities, and so it would have been impossible for it to be obedient, as the following clearly shows.
Every act done contrary to the natural order of things is wearisome, and is consequently bitter and not sweet, as, for instance, sleeping during the day and being awake at night, or walking backward and not forward. A subject when he commands his sovereign acts contrary to the natural order of things, because in the proper order of things it is for the sovereign to give commands to the subject; and so the former is bitter and not sweet. Since, further, it is impossible to obey sweetly a bitter command, it is impossible for a sovereign to obey sweetly when it is a subject who issues the command.
If, therefore, Latin is the vernacular's sovereign, as was shown above to be the case for a number of reasons, and the canzoni – which here have the function of commander – are written in the vernacular, it is impossible for Latin to obey sweetly.
Moreover, an act of obedience is done entirely as the result of a command, and in no respect spontaneously, only when what the person does in obeying he would not have done, either in whole or in part, of his own volition.
So I maintain that, if I were commanded to wear two cloaks when I would have worn one irrespective of any command, my act of obedience would be done in part spontaneously, and not entirely as a result of a command.
Such is how a Latin commentary would have obeyed, and so its act of obedience would not have been done entirely as the result of a command. The following shows that such would indeed have been the case: Latin, without any command from such a lord, would have explained many points made in the course of the commentary – it already does so, as anyone who makes a careful study of works written in Latin is aware – something the vernacular does not in the least do.
Furthermore, an act of obedience is done with measure and not in an unmeasured way when it carries out a command to the limit dictated, without, however, overstepping it. For example, a particular nature is obedient to nature as a whole when it gives a man thirty-two teeth, no more and no less, and when it gives each hand five fingers, no more and no less; similarly, a man is obedient to justice when he makes an offender pay the debt incurred as his punishment, exacting from him no more and no less than justice demands.
A Latin commentary would have failed in this respect too: it would have erred not just on the side of defect, nor just on the side of excess, but of both; its obedience would not, therefore, have been measured, but unmeasured, and it would not, consequently, have been obedient.
It can easily be shown both that Latin would not have carried out its lord's command to the full, and that it would have gone too far. This master, that is, these canzoni, whose servant this commentary is meant to be, command and will that their meaning be explained to all those who, once they had come to grasp their meaning with its help, would then be able to understand the words of the canzoni themselves. There can be no doubt that were the canzoni to voice a command, this is what it would be.
However, a Latin commentary would have explained their meaning only to the educated, for the rest would not have understood it. Consequently, since among those who desire to understand the canzoni the uneducated greatly outnumber the educated, it follows that a Latin commentary would not have carried out to the full the command given to it, unlike one written in the vernacular, which is understood by the educated and uneducated alike.
Moreover, a Latin commentary would have explained the meaning of the canzoni to people of other languages (the Germans, the English and so on), and would thereby have overstepped the bounds of the command given to it, for it would be against the canzoni's will, so to speak, that their meaning should be explained whenever it would be impossible for them to convey this together with their beauty.
As regards this last point, everyone should recognize that no writing fashioned into a harmonious unity by its musical form can be translated from its original language without all its sweetness and harmony being destroyed.
That is why Homer has not been translated from Greek into Latin, unlike the other writings which the Greeks have bequeathed to us. That is why the verses of the Psalter lack music and harmony: they were translated from Hebrew to Greek, and from Greek to Latin, all their sweetness disappearing with that first translation.
I have, then, demonstrated the conclusion that I promised at the beginning of the last chapter.
