
I pity myself so intensely that the pity brings me no less pain than my suffering; for painfully, alas, and unwillingly I feel the air of the last sigh gathering in my heart ‑the heart which the fair eyes smote when Love opened them with his hands to bring me to the moment of my undoing. Alas, how soft, sweet and gentle they were as they lifted towards me, when they began to cause the death that so grieves me, saying: ‘Our light brings peace’ !
‘Peace we'll give to the heart and joy to you,’ they saidn -­the eyes of the fair lady‑ to my eyes on several occasions. But once they knew with their understanding that through her power my mind was now wholly captive, they wheeled about with Love's banners, so that never again, not once, was their victorious aspect seen: hence my soul, which expected consolation from them, is left sorrowful, and now she sees the heart to which she was joined in marriage almost dead, while she must go on her separate way full of love.
Full of love and unconsoled she goes off weeping out of this life, for Love drives her away. She starts on her journey lamenting so bitterly that before she has yet gone her Maker listens to her with compassion. She has shrunk back into the innermost heart with such life as is extinguished only at the instant of her departure; and there she complains against Love who is driving her out of this world; and embraces again and again the vital spirits who mourn continually the loss of their com­panion.
The image of that lady still reigns up in the mind, where she was placed by him who was her guide; but she cares nothing for the suffering she sees ‑indeed, much lovelier than ever now and more full of joy, she seems to laugh; and she lifts her death‑ dealing eyes and cries out in triumph over her who laments at departing: ‘Away with you, wretch, away now !’ Such is the cry of the one I desire, assailing me as she always did ‑though now with less pain for me, inasmuch as my power to feel is much diminished now, and is nearer to the end of its sufferings.
The day that this lady came into the world ‑as I find it written in the book of the mind that is passing away‑ my childish body felt a strange emotion so that I was filled with fear; and suddenly a check was placed on all my faculties, so that I fell to the ground; and if that book does not err, the greater spirit then trembled so violently it seemed just as if death had entered this world to take it. But now He who set this world in motion Himself has pity on it.
And then ‑gentle ladies to whom all this is said- when the great beauty which causes me so much suffering appeared to me, that faculty which is noblest, gazing into the beauty, saw that its own suffering was born, and recognized the desire that was caused by its own intense gazing; so that weeping it then said to the other faculties: ‘Here, representing one whom I have seen, will come as soon as it pleases her eyes, the beautiful image which already affects me with fear and which will rule as mistress over us all.'
It is to you I have spoken, young ladies who have eyes adorned with beauty and minds overcome and troubled by love, to commend my poem to you wherever it may go: and in your presence I pardon that fair one for my death ‑she who's to blame for it, who has never shown compassion.

Congedo.