'Osanna, sanctus Deus sabaoth,
superillustrans claritate tua
felices ignes horum malacoth!' --
Thus, wheeling to the notes of his own melody,
I saw that being, in whom a double light
is twinned, caught up in song,
he and the others moving in their dance
and, like the fastest-flying sparks,
veiled from me by their sudden distance.
I was in doubt, saying to myself, 'Tell her,
tell her,' saying to myself, 'tell this to my lady,
who slakes my thirst with her sweet drops.'
But the reverence that is mistress over me
at the mere sound of Be or ice
bowed down my head, as when a man nods off. 
Not long did Beatrice leave me in this state
before she spoke, shining with the rays of such a smile
as would content a man if he were set on fire:
'In my infallible opinion this idea,
that just revenge itself perhaps deserves
just punishment, has set you thinking.
'But I will quickly free your mind of doubt.
Still, you must listen closely, for my words
shall set before you things of great importance.
'By not enduring, for his own good, a rein
upon his will, that man who was not born,
damning himself, damned all his offspring.
'As a result, for centuries the human race
lay sick in an abyss of error
until the Word of God chose to descend,
'uniting human nature, estranged now
from its Maker, with Himself in His own person
by a single act of His eternal Love.
'Now direct your inner sight on what evolves from that.
This nature, united with its Maker,
was pure and good, even as it was when first created.
'But through the fault of its own doing
it was expelled from Eden
because it turned away from truth and life.
'If, then, the penalty exacted by the cross
is measured by the nature He assumed,
no other ever stung so justly.
'Yet it is also true that there was never done
so great an outrage with regard to Him who suffered,
having taken on that nature.
'From a single act, then, came diverse effects,
for the same death delighted God as well as Jews.
Because of it earth quaked and Heaven opened.
'No longer, from now on, should it seem puzzling
when you hear it said that a just vengeance
was afterward avenged in a just court.
'But now I see your mind entangled,
by one thought and another in a knot
from which, eager, it waits to be untied:
'You say, "I follow closely what I hear,
but why God wanted this to be the very way
for our redemption is obscure to me."
'The reason for this decree, brother, lies buried,
hidden from the eyes of all
whose minds have not been ripened in the flame of love.
'Nonetheless, because so many strive to hit this mark,
while so few can even see it, I shall explain
the reason this was the most fitting choice.
'Spurning any kind of envy, Divine Goodness,
burning within, so sparkles
that it unfolds Eternal Beauty.
'That which, unmediated, derives from it
is thus without an end, because its imprint,
once stamped, can never wear away.
'That which, unmediated, rains down from it
is wholly free, because it is not subject
to the influence of things more recent,
'is more like that Goodness and thus more pleases Him.
The holy ardor that irradiates all things
shines brightest in what most resembles it.
'In all these gifts the human creature
is advantaged, but, if a single gift is lacking,
he must fall from his exalted state.
'Sin alone is what enslaves him,
making him unlike the highest good
so that he is illumined by its light but little,
'never returning to his privilege
unless he fills the void created by his fault
with penalties fit for his sinful pleasure.
'Your nature, when it sinned 
in its seed, was separated
from these privileges and from its Eden.
'Nor could they be recovered -- 
if you consider closely -- by any other recourse
except to ford one of these crossings:
'either that God, in His own clemency,
had pardoned, or that man, of himself,
had given satisfaction for his foolish pride.
'Now fix your eyes deep in the abyss
of the everlasting will of God
and give your strict attention to my words.
'With his limitations, man could never offer
satisfaction, for he could not descend as deep
into humility, by latter-day obedience,
'as, by disobeying, he had thought to rise.
And this is the reason for which he was denied
the power of giving satisfaction on his own.
'Thus it was necessary that God in His own ways
restore man to the fullness of his life -- 
by one way, that is, or by both of them.
'But since the deed more gratifies the doer
the more it shows the goodness
of the heart from which it springs,
'divine goodness, which puts its imprint
on the world, was pleased to proceed
in both its ways to raise you up again.
'Nor between the last night and the first day
was, or will there be, a deed performed -- in the first way
or the second -- so sublime or generous.
'More bountiful was God when He gave Himself,
enabling man to rise again, than if,
in His sole clemency, he had simply pardoned.
'All other means fell short of justice
save that the Son of God
should humble Himself by becoming flesh.
'Now, to satisfy each of your desires,
I go back to clarify one point,
that you may understand it just as I do.
'You say: "I see water, I see fire, air,
and earth -- and all their combinations -- 
become corrupted, lasting only briefly.
'"And yet these things were created,
so that, if what was said is true,
they should be proof against corruption.
'The angels, brother, and this pure country
where you are may be said to have been created
just as they are and in their entire being,
'but those elements that have been named
and those other things made from them
take their form from a created power.
'Created was the matter that is in them,
created, the informing power
in these stars that wheel about them.
'The soul of every beast and every plant
is drawn from a complex of potentials
by the shining and the motion of the holy lights.
'But supreme goodness breathes life in you,
unmediated, and He so enamors your soul
of Himself that it desires Him forever after.
'From this you may, in consequence, deduce 
your resurrection, if you but recall
how then your flesh was made
in the making of the first two parents.'