After fully establishing that if inversions of the proper order are to be avoided then a vernacular and not a Latin commentary is needed, to bring to light and explain the meaning of the canzoni just mentioned, I now wish to show how I was moved also by wholehearted liberality to set Latin aside and to choose the vernacular.
Wholehearted liberality can be recognized when giving is marked by three features; these are realized by the use of the vernacular but would not have been had Latin been used.
The first is to give to many; the second is to give something that is useful; the third is to give one's gift without waiting for it to be requested. To give to one person and to be of help to one person is good; but to give to many people and to be of help to many people is to be good in a whole-hearted way, in that this imitates the way in which benefits are bestowed by God, who is the most universal of benefactors.
Furthermore, it is impossible to give to many people without giving to one, since one is included, in many; but it is quite possible to give to one without giving to many. So anyone who helps many people does both these good acts; anyone who helps one person does only one. We see this reflected in the activity of legislators: in framing laws their principal concern is to keep their eyes firmly fixed on benefits that have the widest diffusion.
Furthermore, to give something that is useless to the recipient is certainly good in that the giver at least shows that he is friendly; but it is not a perfectly good act, and so is not good in a whole-hearted way. Such would be the case were a knight to give a doctor a shield, or a doctor to give a knight Hippocrates' Aphorisms or Galen's Medical Art. This point is reflected in the wise saying that a gift must resemble its recipient, signifying that it must be appropriate and useful to him; a gift of this kind is regarded as manifesting whole-hearted liberality on the part of the person who uses such discrimination in making the gift.
However, since adducing moral arguments usually prompts a desire to grasp the principles on which they are based, I intend in this chapter to give a brief explanation of four reasons why a gift must always be useful to the recipient if it is to manifest whole-hearted liberality.
The first reason is that in all of its acts a virtue must be joyful, not sad; so if a gift lacks joy in being given and received, it does not manifest perfect or whole-hearted virtue. This joy derives entirely from the quality termed usefulness, which remains with the giver in making the gift, and passes to the recipient in his receiving the gift.
The giver, therefore, must have the foresight to ensure that on his side there remain the usefulness constituted by goodness, which is the highest form of usefulness, and that to the recipient there pass the usefulness constituted by a gift that will be useful to him. If the giver acts in this way, both people will be joyful; and the liberality will, therefore, be the more whole‑hearted.
The second reason is that virtue must change things for the better. For just as it would be reprehensible to make a hoe out of a beautiful sword, or a beautiful goblet out of a beautiful lyre, so it is reprehensible to move something from where it is useful and transfer it to where it is less useful.
And since it is reprehensible to act to no purpose, it is reprehensible not only to shift something to where it will be less useful, but even to put it where it will be equally useful.
So if effecting a change in things is to be a cause for praise it mint always be done for the better, since change, more than anything else, requires justification to be a matter for praise. This condition will be satisfied in respect of a gift only if, by changing hands, the gift is enhanced in value; and it cannot be enhanced in value if it is not more useful to the recipient than to the donor. It follows that a gift must be useful to the person who receives it if it is to manifest whole-hearted liberality.
The third reason is that the exercise of virtue must be such as to gain us friends, for having friends is something that human life requires, and the purpose of virtue is to make human life happy. But if a gift is to win the recipient's friendship, it must be useful to him, since it is usefulness that stamps the memory with the image of the gift – which is something that nourishes friendship – and the greater the usefulness, the stronger the impression made.
So it is a common thing for Martin to say: "Never will the gift John gave me fade from my mind." We may conclude that for a gift to manifest liberality, the virtue proper to it, and for this liberality to be whole-hearted, the gift must be useful to the one who receives it.
The final reason is that a virtue must exercise itself through a free, unforced act. An act is free when the person voluntarily goes in a certain direction, which is indicated by his keeping his eyes trained in that direction; an act is forced when the person goes against his will, which is indicated by his not looking in the direction in which he is going.
In the case of a gift, it looks in the direction in which it is going whenever it aims at fulfilling a need in the recipient. Since, further, a gift cannot aim to do this unless it is useful, it must be useful to the direction in which it is going – in other words, to the recipient – if virtue is to exercise itself through a free act. It follows that a gift must be characterized by usefulness to the recipient if it is to manifest whole­hearted liberality.
The third feature in which whole-hearted liberality can be recognized is that the person give the gift without waiting for a request; for giving done in response to a request is, from one perspective, not virtue but trade, since the recipient pays a price even though the donor makes no sale. So we find Seneca saying that "nothing is more dearly bought than what is paid for with our entreaties".
Consequently, if a gift is to manifest whole-hearted liberality and be recognized as so doing, it must be clear of the slightest hint of trading; in short, the gift must not be requested.
Why anything obtained by entreaty is payed for so dearly is a topic I do not intend to treat here, since I shall discuss it fully in the final treatise of this work.
