If flames of fire were clearly to be seen shooting out of the windows of a house, and someone asked if there were a fire inside and someone else replied "yes", I should be hard pressed to decide which of the two would deserve greater ridicule. The same would apply to someone's question and my reply, if he were to ask me if love for my native language burned within me and I replied "yes", after the views put forward above.
Nonetheless, both to show that it is not simply love but quite perfect love for my native language that burns within me, and to discredit its adversaries further by making this plain to any perceptive reader, I shall explain how I became its friend, and then how this friendship has been confirmed.
In accordance with the views expressed by Cicero in On Friendship, which are in agreement with the position clearly held by the Philosopher in the Ethics, I declare that by the law of nature closeness and goodness are causes that generate love; the conferring of benefit, pursuit of a goal, and companionship are causes that deepen it. All these causes have been at work to generate and strengthen the love I bear for my vernacular, as I shall now briefly explain.
Of all the members of any given class of things any one is closer to a person the more fully it is united to him; so, for instance, of all men a son is closest to his father; of all the professional skills medicine is closest to the doctor and music to the musician, since these are the most fully united to them; of all the countries of the earth the one which is closest to a person is the one in which he himself resides, since it is the most fully united to him.
Similarly, that vernacular is closest to a person which is the one most fully united to him, and the vernacular which is most fully united to a person is the one which without rival first acquires a place in his mind, and which is united to him not only intrinsically but incidentally, in that it is part of the people closest to him, such as his relatives, his own fellow citizens and his own race.
I am, of course, speaking of each person's own vernacular, which is not simply close to him, but close in a most intimate way.
Granted, then, what was said above, that closeness is a seed of friendship, it is clear that closeness must be counted one of the causes of the love I bear for my own vernacular, which is nearer to me than any other.
Again, the goodness of my native tongue made me its friend. It should be explained here that any goodness that is proper to something is lovable in it, as, for instance, a man's having a thick beard or a woman's being quite free of facial hair; or a bloodhound's being able to smell keenly or a greyhound's being able to run swiftly.
Indeed any goodness in something is correspondingly more lovable the more proper it is to that thing. Consequently, although every virtue is lovable in man, that virtue is most lovable in him which is most distinctively human; this is none other than justice, which exists exclusively in man's rational or intellectual part, that is, in his will.
So lovable is this virtue that, as the Philosopher says in the Ethics, its very enemies, such as thieves and robbers, love it. We find, for the same reason, that its opposite, injustice, is most deeply hated, as are, for instance, treachery, ingratitude, falsifying, stealing, robbery, deceit and the like;
these sins are so inhuman that, to defend oneself against the infamy of being thought guilty of them, it is allowed by long-established custom that one speak of oneself (as noted above) and have the opportunity to show that one is faithful arid loyal.
Later I shall speak more fully on this virtue; but setting it aside for the moment, I shall return to the main theme. It is now clear how to recognize the goodness most proper to any given thing:
we discover it when we find what in that thing is most loved and praised. And we find that in the matter of language what is always most loved and praised is clarity in the expression of ideas; this, therefore, is its principal goodness. Since, as was demonstrated in an earlier chapter, this goodness is possessed by our vernacular, it is clear that it must be counted one of the causes of the love I bear for it, because, as was said above, goodness is a cause that generates love.
