"Thou Virgin Mother, daughter of thy Son,


  Humble and high beyond all other creature,


  The limit fixed of the eternal counsel,


Thou art the one who such nobility


  To human nature gave, that its Creator


  Did not disdain to make himself its creature.


Within thy womb rekindled was the love,


  By heat of which in the eternal peace


  After such wise this flower has germinated.


Here unto us thou art a noonday torch


  Of charity, and below there among mortals


  Thou art the living fountain-head of hope.


Lady, thou art so great, and so prevailing,


  That he who wishes grace, nor runs to thee,


  His aspirations without wings would fly.


Not only thy benignity gives succour


  To him who asketh it, but oftentimes


  Forerunneth of its own accord the asking.


In thee compassion is, in thee is pity,


  In thee magnificence; in thee unites


  Whate'er of goodness is in any creature.


Now doth this man, who from the lowest depth


  Of the universe as far as here has seen


  One after one the spiritual lives,


Supplicate thee through grace for so much power


  That with his eyes he may uplift himself


  Higher towards the uttermost salvation.


And I, who never burned for my own seeing


  More than I do for his, all of my prayers


  Proffer to thee, and pray they come not short,


That thou wouldst scatter from him every cloud


  Of his mortality so with thy prayers,


  That the Chief Pleasure be to him displayed.


Still farther do I pray thee, Queen, who canst


  Whate'er thou wilt, that sound thou mayst preserve


  After so great a vision his affections.


Let thy protection conquer human movements;


  See Beatrice and all the blessed ones


  My prayers to second clasp their hands to thee!"


The eyes beloved and revered of God,


  Fastened upon the speaker, showed to us


  How grateful unto her are prayers devout;


Then unto the Eternal Light they turned,


  On which it is not credible could be


  By any creature bent an eye so clear.


And I, who to the end of all desires


  Was now approaching, even as I ought


  The ardour of desire within me ended.


Bernard was beckoning unto me, and smiling,


  That I should upward look; but I already


  Was of my own accord such as he wished;


Because my sight, becoming purified,


  Was entering more and more into the ray


  Of the High Light which of itself is true.


From that time forward what I saw was greater


  Than our discourse, that to such vision yields,


  And yields the memory unto such excess.


Even as he is who seeth in a dream,


  And after dreaming the imprinted passion


  Remains, and to his mind the rest returns not,


Even such am I, for almost utterly


  Ceases my vision, and distilleth yet


  Within my heart the sweetness born of it;


Even thus the snow is in the sun unsealed,


  Even thus upon the wind in the light leaves


  Were the soothsayings of the Sibyl lost.


O Light Supreme, that dost so far uplift thee


  From the conceits of mortals, to my mind


  Of what thou didst appear re-lend a little,


And make my tongue of so great puissance,


  That but a single sparkle of thy glory


  It may bequeath unto the future people;


For by returning to my memory somewhat,


  And by a little sounding in these verses,


  More of thy victory shall be conceived!


I think the keenness of the living ray


  Which I endured would have bewildered me,


  If but mine eyes had been averted from it;


And I remember that I was more bold


  On this account to bear, so that I joined


  My aspect with the Glory Infinite.


O grace abundant, by which I presumed


  To fix my sight upon the Light Eternal,


  So that the seeing I consumed therein!


I saw that in its depth far down is lying


  Bound up with love together in one volume,


  What through the universe in leaves is scattered;


Substance, and accident, and their operations,


  All interfused together in such wise


  That what I speak of is one simple light.


The universal fashion of this knot


  Methinks I saw, since more abundantly


  In saying this I feel that I rejoice.


One moment is more lethargy to me,


  Than five and twenty centuries to the emprise


  That startled Neptune with the shade of Argo!


My mind in this wise wholly in suspense,


  Steadfast, immovable, attentive gazed,


  And evermore with gazing grew enkindled.


In presence of that light one such becomes,


  That to withdraw therefrom for other prospect


  It is impossible he e'er consent;


Because the good, which object is of will,


  Is gathered all in this, and out of it


  That is defective which is perfect there.


Shorter henceforward will my language fall


  Of what I yet remember, than an infant's


  Who still his tongue doth moisten at the breast.


Not because more than one unmingled semblance


  Was in the living light on which I looked,


  For it is always what it was before;


But through the sight, that fortified itself


  In me by looking, one appearance only


  To me was ever changing as I changed.


Within the deep and luminous subsistence


  Of the High Light appeared to me three circles,


  Of threefold colour and of one dimension,


And by the second seemed the first reflected


  As Iris is by Iris, and the third


  Seemed fire that equally from both is breathed.


O how all speech is feeble and falls short


  Of my conceit, and this to what I saw


  Is such, 'tis not enough to call it little!


O Light Eterne, sole in thyself that dwellest,


  Sole knowest thyself, and, known unto thyself


  And knowing, lovest and smilest on thyself!


That circulation, which being thus conceived


  Appeared in thee as a reflected light,


  When somewhat contemplated by mine eyes,


Within itself, of its own very colour


  Seemed to me painted with our effigy,


  Wherefore my sight was all absorbed therein.


As the geometrician, who endeavours


  To square the circle, and discovers not,


  By taking thought, the principle he wants,


Even such was I at that new apparition;


  I wished to see how the image to the circle


  Conformed itself, and how it there finds place;


But my own wings were not enough for this,


  Had it not been that then my mind there smote


  A flash of lightning, wherein came its wish.


Here vigour failed the lofty fantasy:


  But now was turning my desire and will,


  Even as a wheel that equally is moved,


Oft have I seen at some cathedral door


  A laborer, pausing in the dust and heat,


  Lay down his burden, and with reverent feet


  Enter, and cross himself, and on the floor


Kneel to repeat his paternoster o'er;


  Far off the noises of the world retreat;


  The loud vociferations of the street


  Become an undistinguishable roar.


So, as I enter here from day to day,


  And leave my burden at this minster gate,


  Kneeling in prayer, and not ashamed to pray,


The tumult of the time disconsolate


  To inarticulate murmurs dies away,


  While the eternal ages watch and wait.


How strange the sculptures that adorn these towers!


  This crowd of statues, in whose folded sleeves


  Birds build their nests; while canopied with leaves


  Parvis and portal bloom like trellised bowers,


And the vast minster seems a cross of flowers!


  But fiends and dragons on the gargoyled eaves


  Watch the dead Christ between the living thieves,


  And, underneath, the traitor Judas lowers!


Ah! from what agonies of heart and brain,


  What exultations trampling on despair,


  What tenderness, what tears, what hate of wrong,


What passionate outcry of a soul in pain,


  Uprose this poem of the earth and air,


  This mediaeval miracle of song!


I enter, and I see thee in the gloom


  Of the long aisles, O poet saturnine!


  And strive to make my steps keep pace with thine.


  The air is filled with some unknown perfume;


The congregation of the dead make room


  For thee to pass; the votive tapers shine;


  Like rooks that haunt Ravenna's groves of pine,


  The hovering echoes fly from tomb to tomb.


From the confessionals I hear arise


  Rehearsals of forgotten tragedies,


  And lamentations from the crypts below


And then a voice celestial that begins


  With the pathetic words, "Although your sins


  As scarlet be," and ends with "as the snow."


With snow-white veil, and garments as of flame,


  She stands before thee, who so long ago


  Filled thy young heart with passion and the woe


  From which thy song in all its splendors came;


And while with stern rebuke she speaks thy name,


  The ice about thy heart melts as the snow


  On mountain heights, and in swift overflow


  Comes gushing from thy lips in sobs of shame.


Thou makest full confession; and a gleam


  As of the dawn on some dark forest cast,


  Seems on thy lifted forehead to increase;


Lethe and Eunoe—the remembered dream


  And the forgotten sorrow—bring at last


  That perfect pardon which is perfect peace.


I Lift mine eyes, and all the windows blaze


  With forms of saints and holy men who died,


  Here martyred and hereafter glorified;


  And the great Rose upon its leaves displays


Christ's Triumph, and the angelic roundelays,


  With splendor upon splendor multiplied;


  And Beatrice again at Dante's side


  No more rebukes, but smiles her words of praise.


And then the organ sounds, and unseen choirs


  Sing the old Latin hymns of peace and love


  And benedictions of the Holy Ghost;


And the melodious bells among the spires


  O'er all the house-tops and through heaven above


  Proclaim the elevation of the Host!


O star of morning and of liberty!


  O bringer of the light, whose splendor shines


  Above the darkness of the Apennines,


  Forerunner of the day that is to be!


The voices of the city and the sea,


  The voices of the mountains and the pines,


  Repeat thy song, till the familiar lines


  Are footpaths for the thought of Italy!


Thy fame is blown abroad from all the heights,


  Through all the nations; and a sound is heard,


  As of a mighty wind, and men devout,


Strangers of Rome, and the new proselytes,


  In their own language hear thy wondrous word,


  And many are amazed and many doubt.


